7. What Made Jennings Different

WHAT MADE JENNINGS DIFFERENT
A
sa K. Jennings (AKJ) was born September 20, 1877, in Ontario, New
York. Ontario was a rural town about 20 miles east of Rochester, NY, and
just south of Lake Ontario, the smallest and most easterly of the Great Lakes.
Most people lived on farms and worked 6 days a week.
Asa was the 3rd of 6 children born to Hiram Jennings (b. Aug. 18,1841; d.
Sept. 19, 1918) and Emma Carey Jennings (b. Oct. 6, 1851; d. Feb. 15,
1936). Living conditions by the standards of today were hard, and no child
was privileged. They faced a life of hard work and love as their reward.
One has only to live in Upstate New York to know how cold it gets during
winter. A month of 30 degrees below zero F. is not uncommon. There can be
mountains of snow and particularly located next to the Lake where there is
lake effect snow. The houses of 1877 did not have insulation and windows
had only a single pane of glass. The cold air would go through the houses.
There was no indoor plumbing. So people visited the outhouse to relieve
their bodily needs. My Father, Asa W. Jennings (AWJ) said he would go to
the outhouse in the winter, pull his pants down, but be so cold that he could
not take care of his personal business. So he would pull his pants up, go back
in the house, but then had the need to go to the outhouse again. Yet, in the
family diaries and letters there is not one complaint about the cold weather
or harsh conditions. A hard life is what they expected.
A typical week was to work on the farm long hours Monday through
Saturday. Sunday the family went to church, had a large meal at noon, and
had only Sunday afternoon to visit with friends. Working on a farm did not
involve seeing many people. Neighbors helped each other raising barns and
other work when help was required. Seeing friends at church and neighbors
broke the boredom of repetitive work. Social life revolved around church
life.
The first electricity in Upstate New York was in Buffalo in 1895 after a
hydro electric facility was built. So the farm did not have electric lights after
the sun went down, or electrical implements to make farming easier. Fields
were tilled with a plow behind a horse.
There were no newspapers, radio, television, and, of course, computers.
Families made their own entertainment. So many people played musical
instruments. Many people read the Bible daily. There were no cars or
grocery stores. People grew their own food and preserved food. The glass
ball jar for home canning was invented in Buffalo, New York, in 1886. There
were no freezers or preservatives for foods. People had root cellars, and
would cut ice in the lakes during the winter to keep storage areas cold. Being
Methodists, alcohol and smoking were forbidden. Food was not pickled in
alcohol as a preservative. Other than the lack of medical personnel and
medicines, people lived a healthy life style with physical work in fresh air.
The air became polluted with the industrialization of World War Two,
growth of population and the large increase in the number of automobiles. I
can remember flying in the late 1940s with my Father AWJ in his plane over
Long Island where the air was crystal clear and the sky was blue, until we
approached New York City. There was a dirty brown cloud like a mushroom
that hung over New York City. The healthy life style of the 1800s and early
1900s and clean environment contributed to so many people living long
lives. You never, for example, heard of the diseases of today like cancer, high
blood pressure, allergies and addictions of all kinds.
In the Hiram and Emma Jennings family, the first born was a son Lewis (b.
Nov. 2, 1873; d. March 11, 1967). Then Edith (b. Nov. 18, 1880; d. Feb. 9,
1974) was the second child. She married a Free Methodist minister. After
Asa in 1877 came Hiram (b. Oct. 10, 1884) and then the twins Ruth and
Raymond (b. May 29, 1889). Raymond died at age 2 and 9 months of spinal
meningitis. Spinal meningitis is an inflammation of the protective membranes
covering the brain and spinal cord. The sickness is caused by bacteria and is
contagious. An anti-serum from the blood of horses was not developed until
1907. The best treatment is penicillin, but that was not discovered until 1928.
So spinal meningitis was almost always fatal.
Most diseases were the result of poor sanitation. People typically took one
bath a week, if that. Water was heated on the stove, and after one person took
a bath, the next person used the same bath water. The outhouse, or privy as it
was also called, did not have toilet paper. Toilet paper was first sold around
1867, and rolls of toilet paper were not invented until 1907, the year AWJ
was born. Paper was first advertised as splinter-free in the 1930s. Chamber
pots were commonly used, especially at night, so people did not have to go
out into the cold. The environment could not have been pleasant.
Working on the farm people were not exposed to herbicides. Herbicides
were not developed until after World War Two. The only weed control was
tillage. So the working environment was clean, but the quality of produce had
to be affected.
Families typically included a lot of children, but disease and accidents
took their toll. There was no birth control other than abstinence. Children
typically were born at home. The medical profession and development of
medicines were in their infancy by the standards of today. People did not
have abortions. Divorce and children being born out of wedlock were rare.
Family bonds were strong, and family reunions were common. The Jennings
family came to these hardships of America as the Jenny family.
Hiram and Emma Jennings were very proud of their family heritage.
Family of Hiram and Emma Carey Jennings
Back row: Asa K., Lewis, Wallace
Front row: Edith, Hiram, Emma, Ruth
The objective of people coming to America was religious freedom. They
chose to endure the hardships to live in America to be free to pursue life as
they desired. That desire for freedom, however harsh the conditions, became
an American value that separates Americans today from many other peoples
of the world.
The Jennings family came to the American Colonies in 1623 as part of the
Plymouth Colony just south of Boston. This community was the first of the
American colonies. The family came as the Jenny family, and changed the
family name years later to Jennings. The Mother of Asa K. Jennings was born
as Emma Carey, and her family was also part of the Plymouth Colony. Their
family name then was Cary. Both families participated in the American
Revolutionary War to drive the British out of the Colonies. Later, both were
part of the Union Army and Navy to defeat the Confederate States in the U.S.
Civil War. The objective of the War included ending slavery of African
Americans and therefore the liberation of the human spirit.
Life in America changed little between 1623 and the early 1900’s. People
continued to live in harsh conditions with high birth rates and then death due
to infectious diseases and accidents. A detailed description of life over these
years for the Jenny and Cary families appears at the end of this book as The
Hardships of Early America.
Asa K. Jennings graduated from Webster High School in 1896. Webster,
New York, is just east of Rochester. He then attended Syracuse University in
Syracuse, New York, in the period 1900-2 until he did not have the money to
continue. AKJ went to work at the YMCA in Utica in 1901 until 1903. He
met his wife Amy Will in Utica where she was working as a secretary for a
lawyer. They married in 1902. They moved to Carthage, New York, in 1903
where AKJ was General Secretary of the YMCA. They remained there until
1905. The YMCA has served many purposes, including overnight boarding,
promotion of Christian character, sportsmanship, scholastic achievement and
vocational training. Children are taught a positive developmental experience
through making new friends, building confidence and growing self-reliance.
This was an important experience for AKJ which he would apply in Turkey
from 1923-33. In 1905 Amy and Asa Jennings were transferred back to the
Utica, New York, YMCA. In 1906 AKJ was ordained as a minister of the
Methodist Church. In those days there was insufficient income of a church to
support the pastor and his family. So the pastor was a farmer or had other
work as a source of income. This is when AKJ contracted Pott’s Disease.
Pott’s Disease
Asa K. Jennings was diagnosed with this disease in 1905. Pott’s disease is
a form of tuberculosis that occurs outside of the lungs whereby disease is
seen in the spinal vertebrae…The lower thoracic and upper lumbar vertebrae
are the areas of the spine most often affected…Pott’s disease results from the
spread of tuberculosis from other sites, often the lungs. The infection then
spreads from two adjacent vertebrae into the adjoining intervertebral disc
space. If only one vertebra is affected, the disc is normal, but if two are
involved, the disc, which is avascular, cannot receive nutrients and
collapses. The disc tissue dies and is broken down, leading to vertebral
narrowing and eventually to vertebral collapse and spinal damage.
This infectious disease is more common where public health practices
allow infections to spread, and can be the result of direct contact with a
person already infected. In 1905 the drugs to treat Pott’s Disease were not
yet available. The recommended treatment was a brace to prevent the
collapse. AKJ wore a body cast for two years, but then against the
recommendation of his doctor removed the cast himself. The result was the
spine collapsed. AKJ lost 5” of height. As horrible as this seems, to the
faithful I submit this was the work of Providence. As the reader will learn by
reading further, AKJ’s hunchback opened doors to Asa saving thousands of
lives.
AKJ’s widow Amy wrote a letter in 1942 that explains the pain and
suffering AKJ experienced. This letter also reveals the faith and character of
Asa and Amy Jennings:
I am glad you asked those questions for to me the way he kept his courage,
always smiling even through the darkest hours, and finally overcome
physical handicaps sufficiently to do the great work he did, I consider the
most amazing part of his life story, something that should encourage any
one never to give up regardless of discouragements…
When about twenty eight Mr. Jennings had his first real illness, a severe
case of typhoid with two relapses. He did not regain a normal temperature
and after a year of terrible suffering, not able to find any doctor who could
diagnose his case, I took him to the Homeopathic Hospital at Syracuse
(New York), now called the General Hospital. On Saturday we had a
council of doctors and that evening they gave me their report which was
that Mr. Jennings was tubercular through and through, lungs, throat and
bowels; that going to a western climate could not possibly help him, that
he might live a few weeks, or months, or possibly longer but all I could do
was to keep him comfortable. During three consecutive years over twenty
doctors told me the same thing but I never continued to employ a doctor
who had no hope for I did not want them to discourage me.
That Saturday evening after the doctors gave me their opinion I thought
there never was any suffering greater than mine for Sunday morning I must
tell my husband what they said. I well knew how dear life was to him and
the hopes he had for the future so I did not see how I ever could tell him
such an awful verdict. I cried and prayed all that night and in the morning I
prayed that as I opened the Bible at random I would be directed to a
passage that would give me strength to tell Mr. Jennings what the doctors
believed.
The words “at random” are emphasized by the author as the second sign of
Providence.
As I opened the Bible to St. John, 11th chapter, I wondered how I could
find courage and strength there but my eye caught the 4th verse and from
that moment, although I knew it was going to be a long hard pull, I knew he
would ultimately recover.
“This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of
God might be glorified thereby.” John 11:4 This is Providence, the protective
care of God. Family Bible
I went to the hospital and commenced first to tell him the end of the story,
that we had a promise which we must always believe in spite of every
discouragement or what doctors might say for they didn’t know everything.
He had a very strong religious faith so later when I told him what the
doctors had told me it did not give him the shock it otherwise would have.
During the following two years when the darkness of despair almost
overwhelmed us, we would talk about that promise which always gave us
strength and courage to go on.
Mr. Jennings was in that hospital eight weeks with only milk and strained
broth until he weighed only eighty-five pounds. He did not gain and often
said he felt as though if he could get up into the Adirondacks (mountains)
he would improve but they would not let him leave because he had a high
temperature. He finally told me that together we would fool the nurses, that
during the night the light was dim so they could not see he did not close his
mouth on the thermometer. Then during the day I should attract their
attention some way so he could fool them. It worked and we left for the
Seventh Lake House at Seventh Lake in the Adirondacks where we spent
that summer, and also the following summer. We had not been there long
before I discovered that his spine was curving which proved to be Pott’s
disease of the spine that had caused a double curvature which was really
causing most of his intense suffering.
For two years Mr. Jennings wore a plaster of Paris cast; and a large cold
abscess formed in the left lung with such pressure on the lung that it was
almost impossible to breathe except as he laid with his head in an open
window. This abscess from the spine drained out through the left lung
which eventually left him only 45% breathing capacity. The difficult
breathing over taxed the heart. So the heart enlarged and it was pushed to
one side by the curved spine. That caused cardiac asthma which was most
severe for he felt as though he was being hung.
One night at Seventh Lake it seemed as though he could not possibly live
until morning. It was so difficult for him to breath. The doctor told me it
would be necessary to take him to Utica the next morning for an
exploratory operation unless his temperature was down. I felt he did not
have sufficient strength to get to Utica and how earnestly I did pray that
night that his temperature would be normal in the morning although he had
carried a temperature for two years. During the night pus commenced to
gush from his mouth. He thought he was throwing up his lungs. So he
feared it might be the end. However, he could breath better and the next
morning when the doctor came to take him to the hospital he was amazed
to find his temperature NORMAL. When I told him what had happened he
said then it was a cold abscess and it had broken during the night. So Mr.
Jennings did not go to the hospital.
I do not know how I happened to believe massage would help Mr.
Jennings for not one doctor told me. However, I went to Clifton Springs
with Mr. Jennings and there I learned massage. For three years I gave him
the deep massage for an hour and a half in the morning and an hour and a
half at night and more during the night, if he was suffering intensely. Now
that our own daughter is an osteopathic physician and surgeon I believe,
although unscientific, it was that sort of principle that cured him for all the
doctors said it was as much of a miracle as any related in the Bible.
It was remarkable how our prayers, unreasonable ones you might say,
were answered during those years of suffering which always renewed our
faith. We would read the book of Job together, always interested to see
how he endured.
How many, many times Mr. Jennings said to me:
‘Amy, I can’t die yet for I feel I have a great work to do and I must go to
see Jerusalem.’
I could not understand how he would be able to do either for I was not
asking more than his life be spared which seemed so much.
At this point in the life of Asa K. Jennings, the greatest distance he had
ever traveled was from Rochester, New York, to Utica, New York, a distance
requiring about a two hour drive today. So on what was to be his deathbed,
he proclaimed he had to go to Jerusalem. Continuing with the letter of Mrs.
Amy Jennings:
This chapter I enclose gives you an idea of a small part of his life of
service and he did go to Jerusalem twice. The first time he went on an
American destroyer when he was collecting those refugees. Then two
years later when we were living in Constantinople we went. We took our
three children. The doctor said because of a nervous breakdown I had
suffered Mr. Jennings must take me to the most interesting place he knew.
Mr. Jennings recovered from the active tuberculosis but the results of that
illness always remained. From the curvature he had lost over three inches
(5” actually) in height, a chronic throat trouble which caused him to cough
terribly and the cardiac asthma. So he was never strong. In his condition
most people would want to live within easy reaching distance of a hospital
or sanitarium, if not in one, but he feared nothing. He did not fear even
death itself when he was constantly in danger during those awful days in
Smyrna. Doctors have told me had it not been for his humorous disposition
he would have passed away during the first year of his long illness. But, I
think it was the will of God that he lived to be of service to mankind. He
always believed that I saved his life but certainly I did not know what to
do, except as I was lead by a power higher than mankind for the physicians
utterly failed.
AKJ was the Methodist minister in Forestport, New York, in 1907-8
where the Author’s Father Asa W. Jennings was born in the parsonage in
1907. The family moved to the church in Trenton, New York. In 1909 Wilbur
Jennings was born in nearby Barneveld. Asa was the pastor in Richfield
Springs, New York, in 1914-15 where sister Bertha was born in 1914. Then
Asa served the church in Chateaugay, New York, during 1916-17 before
serving the YMCA in the U.S. Army. He was stationed in Newport News,
Virginia, and Camp Merritt, New Jersey, before being transferred to the
YMCA at the Army camp in Le Mans, France in 1918. After World War One
AKJ worked for the International YMCA headquartered in Geneva,
Switzerland. He was assigned to Czechoslovakia where his wife and three
children joined him. As Regional Director his duties were similar to his
experience in Carthage, New York, but the challenges were much greater. In
August 1922, AKJ and family were transferred to Smyrna, Turkey. They
traveled by boat first to Istanbul and then to Smyrna on the west coast of
Turkey.
The story of the family which produced Asa K. Jennings was one of
priorities: faith, country, family, and last, self. Christianity teaches that God
is Love. Love can be explained as giving without expecting anything in
return. If you expect something in return, that is a commercial transaction and
not Love. AKJ, and those of us reading this book, are mostly confronted by
self-serving people interested in their own position and wealth. That was not
AKJ. His actions as a Christian were what empowered him to save
1,250,000 people from certain death in Turkey. If he was interested in power
and wealth, like all the others, except a Greek Navy Captain, then AKJ
would not have been driven by the requirement of being a Christian to help
the helpless people.
As you later read about the obstacles to saving human lives, you will see
that many people who could have helped instead were only interested in their
own positions and wealth. Without the vision of the Turkish national hero
who was the Turkish leader and a Greek Navy Captain whose moral
compass pointed true, many thousands of people would have died. The
organization and initiative for the rescue operation came from a hunchback
American with the heart of a lion.
Power and wealth when used for a good purpose are desirable, but never
when ego is placed before the welfare of others. So, then, how should have
all these people conducted themselves? The answer is quite simple. The
Golden Rule can be found in Matthew 7:12 and Luke 6:13. In modern
language rather than the exact words of the King James Version of the Bible,
“do unto others as you would have others do unto you.” If that had been the
guide that people followed, a lot of suffering would have been avoided.
To learn more about Asa K. Jennings, see the 30 minute video on
https://www.vimeo.com/52745334. MGM produced a movie short titled
“Strange Destiny” about the actions of Asa K. Jennings. That movie is on
www.vimeo.com/49285170.
Family of Asa K. and Amy W. Jennings with Asa W. in back
and Wilbur in front
Asa K. Jennings in uniform in Le Mans, France
The Asa K. Jennings Family in 1932
Back row: Asa W., Bertha, Wilbur
Front row: Amy, Asa K.