2. Ottoman Turk Rule over Greece

OTTOMAN TURK RULE OVER GREECE
W
hen we think of Greece, we think of a sophisticated country that led the
world in art, architecture, math, poetry and the development of the city state.
Names like Aristotle, Plato, and Socrates come to mind. This is the country
where the Olympics were started, and the Parthenon was built. Athens and
the Greeks have a long and distinguished history.
Life in Greece turned dramatically worse after the Ottoman Turks
occupied Greece. Most of the territories today within modern Greece’s
borders were at least once part of the Ottoman Empire from the mid-15th
century until its declaration of independence in 1821, a historical period also
known as Tourkokratia (Turkocracy).” That was almost 400 years.
Life in Greece for almost the next 200 years since the declaration of
independence has also been gravely affected by Greek relations to Turkey.
Ottoman Occupation for Almost 400 Years
Ottoman Greece was a multiethnic society rather than being composed of
just Greeks and Turks. There were many Jews that had come from Spain,
Italians, Armenians and others. This population we call Greeks was given
some privileges and freedom by the Ottoman Turks. The Greeks were also
exposed to a tyranny deriving from the malpractices of feudal Ottoman
administrative personnel. The central government located in Istanbul had
only remote and incomplete control. Despite losing their political
independence, however, the Greeks remained dominant in the fields of
commerce and business. The Ottoman Turks were an imperial military
organization, and not merchants. The subjects of the Ottoman Turks were the
merchants. The consolidation of Ottoman power in the 15th and 16th centuries
rendered the Mediterranean safe for Greek shipping and Greek ship owners
became the maritime carriers of the Empire.
This period of Ottoman occupation had a profound impact in Greek
society. New elites emerged. The Greek land-owning aristocracy that
traditionally dominated the Byzantine Empire suffered a tragic fate, and was
almost completely destroyed. The new leading class was composed mostly
of bureaucrats and tax collectors. These bureaucrats and tax collectors had a
negative reputation for corruption and nepotism.
The Greek businessmen and diplomats located in the Phanar neighborhood
of Istanbul were different. They were respected for their capability. They
were known as Phanariots. The word Phanariots derives from the location in
Istanbul called the Phanar where the Ecumenical Patriarch of the Eastern
Orthodox Church resided and conducted the business of the Church. His All-
Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew is the current leader of the
Church of some three hundred million people today. He is located in the
same Phanar.
These Phanariots were prominent in the imperial capital of Istanbul. Using
their influence, the Greek Orthodox Church and the Ecumenical Patriarch
rose to great power under the Sultan’s protection, gaining religious control
over the entire Orthodox population of the Empire. Great value was placed
on education and diplomatic skill among the Phanariots. This had been true in
the earlier Byzantine era. By contrast, the Ottoman Turks were not raised
with this tradition. So the Sultan sought the help of the Phanariots by placing
them in key positions for their knowledge and skill.
Ottoman rule of the provinces was characterized by two main functions.
The local administrators within the provinces were to maintain a military
establishment and to collect taxes. The military establishment was feudal in
character. The Sultan’s cavalry was entirely Turkish. These members of the
military were allotted land. The size of the land was based on the rank of the
individual cavalryman. All non-Muslims were forbidden to ride a horse. The
Ottomans divided Greece into six sanjaks, each ruled by a Sanjakbey
accountable to the Sultan.
These Ottoman nobles lived well on the proceeds of their estates. The land
of the estate was tilled largely by peasants. The Ottomans basically installed
this feudal system right over the top of the existing system of peasant tenure.
The peasantry continued to own the land that supported the Ottoman nobles.
The ownership of the land was passed down as an inheritance in peasant
families. The peasants were not required to serve in the military. They were
not trusted by the Ottoman government to be loyal. All non-Muslims were
forbidden from carrying arms.
The Greek people were, however, heavily taxed by the Ottoman Empire
and this tax included a ‘tribute of children.’ The Ottomans required that one
male child in five within every Christian family be taken away from the
family and enrolled in the corps of Janissaries for military training in the
Sultan’s army. There were many repressive laws, and occasionally the
Ottoman government committed massacres against the civilian population.
No Greek’s word could stand against a Turk’s in a court of law.
The Turkish regime gave privileges and freedom to its subject people. At
the same time the Turkish regime imposed a tyranny on their subjects. The
local administrative personnel were responsible for the tyranny. The central
authority in Istanbul exercised only remote and incomplete control. In fact,
the ‘rayahs’ were downtrodden and exposed to the vagaries of Turkish
administration and sometimes to the Greek landlords. The term rayah came to
denote an underprivileged, tax-ridden and socially inferior population.
The economic situation of the majority of Greece deteriorated heavily
during the Ottoman era of the country. People became impoverished and
subject to a militarized society. Heavy burdens of taxation were placed on
the Christian population, and many Greeks were reduced to subsistence
farming whereas during prior eras the region had been heavily developed
and urbanized. The exception to this rule was in Istanbul and the Venetian-
held Ionian island where many Greeks lived in prosperity. Greeks heavily
resented the declining economic situation in their country during the Ottoman
era.
The Sultan regarded the Ecumenical Patriarch of the Greek Orthodox
Church as the leader of all Orthodox, Greeks or not, within the empire. The
Patriarch was accountable to the Sultan for the good behavior of the
Orthodox population, and in exchange he was given wide powers over the
Orthodox communities, including the non-Greek Slavic peoples. The
Patriarch controlled the courts and the schools, as well as the Church,
throughout the Greek communities of the empire. This made Orthodox priests,
together with the local magnates, the effective rulers of Greek towns and
cities. Greek heritage, and during the 19th century, adherence to the Greek
Orthodox faith became increasingly a mark of Greek nationality.
The priests were both religious and civil leaders, but they were not police
to maintain order or prevent violence.
As a rule, the Ottomans did not require the Greeks to become Muslims.
Many did become Muslim on a superficial level in order to avert the
socioeconomic hardships of Ottoman rule or because of the alleged
corruption of the Greek clergy.
Greeks paid a land tax and a heavy tax on trade. The tax on trade took
advantage of the wealthy Greeks to fill the state coffers. Greeks, like other
Christians, were also made to pay the jizya. This Islamic poll-tax was
Imposed on all non-Muslims in the empire. Muslims also made a payment as
part of the 5 pillars of Islam. Failure to pay the jizya could result in the
pledge of protection of the Christian’s life and property becoming void. The
alternative was conversion, enslavement or death.
Greeks had to carry a receipt certifying their payment of jizya at all times
or be subject to imprisonment. Greeks did not have to serve in the Sultan’s
army, but the young boys that were taken away and converted to Islam were
made to serve in the Ottoman military. In addition, girls were taken in order
to serve as odalisques in harems. An odalisque was a female slave or
concubine in a harem.
These practices are called the ‘tribute of children’ whereby every
Christian community was required to give one son in five to be raised as a
Muslim and enrolled in the corps of Janissaries, elite units of the Ottoman
army. There was much resistance. For example, Greek folklore tells of
mothers crippling their sons to avoid their abduction.
The incorporation of Greece into the Ottoman Empire had other long-term
consequences. Economic activity declined to a great extent mainly because
trade flowed towards cities like Thessaloniki, Izmir, and Istanbul, and the
population declined, at least in the lowland areas. Greek culture and
education declined significantly with the exception of the Orthodox Church.
After the unsuccessful Ottoman siege of Vienna in 1683 the Ottoman
Empire entered a long decline both militarily and economically against the
Christian powers. Internally, corruption, repression and inefficiency
increased. Discontent increased and that led to disorders and occasionally
rebellions. Moreover, it led to an accelerated population decline.
The position of educated and privileged Greeks within the Ottoman
empire, however, improved greatly in the 17th and 18th centuries. As the
empire became more settled, and began to feel its increasing backwardness
in relation to the European powers, it increasingly recruited Greeks who had
the kind of administrative, technical and financial skills which the Ottomans
lacked.
A secret Greek nationalist organization called the ‘Friendly Society’ was
formed in Odessa in 1814. The members of the organization planned a
rebellion with the support of wealthy Greek exile communities in Britain and
the United States. They also gained support from sympathizers in Western
Europe, as well as covert assistance from Russia. On March 25 (now Greek
Independence Day) 1821, the Orthodox Bishop Germanos of Patras
proclaimed a national uprising.
Simultaneous risings were planned across Greece. With the initial
advantage of surprise, aided by Ottoman inefficiency, the Greeks succeeded
in capturing the Peloponnese and some other areas. Some of the first Greek
actions were taken against unarmed Ottoman settlements. About 40% of
Turkish and Albanian Muslim residents of the Peloponnese were killed
outright, and the rest fled the area or were deported.
The Ottomans recovered, and retaliated in turn with savagery, massacring
the Greek population of Chios and other towns. The Greeks were unable to
establish a strong government in the areas they controlled, and
characteristically fell to fighting amongst themselves. In October 1827 the
British, French and Russian fleets, on the initiative of local commanders but
with the tacit approval of their governments destroyed the Ottoman fleet at
the Battle of Navarino. This was the decisive moment in the war of
independence.
In October 1828, the French landed troops in the Peloponnese to stop the
Ottoman atrocities. Under their protection, the Greeks were able to regroup
and form a government. They then advanced to seize as much territory as
possible, including Athens and Thebes, before the Western Powers imposed
a ceasefire.
A conference in London in March 1829 proposed an independent Greek
state. By the Convention of May 11, 1832, Greece was finally recognized as
a sovereign state. When the Ottomans finally granted the Greeks their
independence, a multi-power treaty was formally established in 1830. To
prevent further experiments in republican government, the Great Powers,
especially Russia, insisted that Greece be a monarchy, and the Bavarian
Prince Otto, was chosen to be its first king. The purpose was to stop the
infighting that had paralyzed progress. The same problem has existed in many
subsequent years in Greece. The Russians turned out to be correct in their
assessment of the Greeks.
A period of almost 400 years of Turkish oppression, poverty and declining
economic opportunities, and disorganization had ended. Hatred of Turks was
firmly implanted in the Greek character. Corruption was still common. The
Greek people needed to be unified, and the economy strengthened.
Greece After the Ottomans Left
The economy was not developed to support the Greek people and the
ambitions of the politicians, and corruption continued to draw from the
economy. Rather than develop Greek resources, the politicians incurred
foreign debt.
Greece entered a new period of one hundred years of expansion and
growth that ended with the invasion of Turkey in 1919 and defeat of the
Greek Army in 1922. Greece to this day has not recovered from the calamity
of those decisions made by politicians. These self-appointed gods served
their egos rather selecting the best options for the people they were supposed
to serve. They also ignored the teachings of their religion.
Greece by 1830 was a much smaller country than it is today. The
expansions are listed in the next chapter, The Megali Idea. However, Greece
was positioned to prosper with its new freedom. Greece was a maritime
power that was able to trade with the world. The population believed in
education, family, the institution of the Church, and their future. The
population was multi-ethnic possessing many skills and resources. After
securing the freedom of the Greek people, the #1 objective of the leaders,
including the politicians, should have been to start the economic engine that
would raise the standard of living of all Greeks. The Greek politicians, like
most politicians around the world in history, did not exhibit the knowledge
and skill necessary to raise productivity and to increase the number of jobs.
Greece was a remnant of the Byzantine Empire. The Muslims had
conquered much of the former Byzantine lands. Christianity had been pushed
back. So the Byzantines developed principles and methods of negotiating and
diplomacy that were more sophisticated than employed by modern day
diplomats. The Byzantine diplomats were carefully schooled in the art and
science as the first line of defense of Christendom. This trade craft survived
as second nature to the Greeks to the current day.
In Cyprus today, for example, the Greek Cypriots are applying their
mastery of Byzantine negotiating tactics so expertly that the Turkish Cypriots
do not understand how they are being controlled. The Turks have
commanding military superiority, but the Greek Cypriots control the day by
their Byzantine tactics. The Greek Cypriots belong to the European Union,
are recognized by many countries and trade with many countries. The Turkish
Cypriots are recognized only by the Republic of Turkey, and are cut off in
trade with all other countries of the world, except the Republic of Turkey.
Something as simple as mailing a letter to someone on the Turkish Cypriot
side of the island must be addressed to a post office in Mersin, Turkey.
The Greek Cypriots with the help of Greece and the Greek military elected
the military option in 1974, and tried to drive the Turkish Cypriots off the
island. The Turkish Cypriots with help from the Republic of Turkey, which
had guaranteed in 1960 the sovereignty of all citizens of Cyprus, defeated the
Greek Cypriots. The island of Cyprus was divided into two countries. The
Greek Cypriots occupy the southern end which is called Cyprus. The
northern end is occupied by the Turkish Cypriots. The Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus was established as a sovereign country. The minority
Turkish Cypriots with the help of the Republic of Turkey could drive the
Greek Cypriots off the island. However, modern day Turks are not like
Ottoman Turks. Today the Turks follow the prescription of President Ataturk
“Peace at Home, Peace in the World.” The change in Turkish persona allows
the Greek Cypriots to dominate the political process with their Byzantine
methods.
As the Greeks in Greece began their century of freedom and prosperity
with the objective of expanding their territory and influence, they had
options. One option was military force as an instrument of foreign policy.
Another was to employ their great knowledge and skill learned during
Byzantine times. The later does not require committing sons to war. Ego,
unfortunately, comes first, and the options were not carefully considered or
employed. However, the Greek politicians were successful for about 100
years exercising the military option..
Greece missed the opportunity to develop a trading relationship with
Turkey which they called Asia Minor. The Ottoman Turks had great natural
resources, but had always relied on foreigners to export. The Turks had no
significant manufacturing base, and relied on imports for manufactured and
processed products. The Ottoman Turks needed the educated, sophisticated
and skilled foreigners like the Greeks. The Ottoman Turks did not believe in
education like the Greeks. The two countries actually complemented each
other. Each had what the other needed. Certainly there was violence in
Ottoman Turkey, but Turks, like Armenians and Greeks, suffered from that
violence. The Jews managed to stay clear of the violence. The Greek leaders
could have strengthened the Greek economy and position in Turkey by
employing their skills as negotiators, but chose the military option instead.
In the geo-political world one of the considerations should be relative
strength when the military option is going to be exercised. The Heritage
Foundation lists the comparable populations as:
When the decision was made in Greece to land the Greek Army in Smyrna,
Turkey, the Turks outnumbered the Greek population by more than two to one.
People will say the landing was authorized by the Treaty of Sevres and
supported by the Allies (except the United States), and more. However, the
basic fact of relative population size favored the Turks. The subsequent
comparative growth reflects the continuing political turmoil in Greece
compared to an authoritarian government in Turkey that focused on growth
and staying out of wars that tax the economy.
The Heritage Foundation also noted that in 1913 90% of Greek households
considered the political parties in Greece to be corrupt. Unemployment in
Greece in 2014 was 25% while only 3.9% in the Republic of Turkey. The
economy and corruption have remained major problems for nearly 200 years
since the Ottoman Turks left Greece.
One of the basic requirements to wage war is the money to pay the troops
and equip them. All during the century Greece incurred trade deficits. Trade
deficits have to be funded. Greece should have established trade surpluses
before engaging in foreign wars as a way of paying for the wars. The
economy of Greece has never been strong enough to meet the financial
requirements at home and to support a Greek Army on a foreign expedition.
As a result, Greece has borrowed money ever since becoming a free country.
Konstantinos Menzel wrote on January 26, 2014, in the Greek Reporter:
“From the beginning, our state had no other choice than to live on
credit. We were born in debt.” – Gerassimos Notaras, head archivist,
historical archive, National Bank of Greece
The debt history of Greece begins well before an official Greek state was
created. The preparations for the Greek War of Independence saw two
foreign loans being contracted with Britain. From a total of 800,000 pounds
negotiated, the Greeks only got 300,000 pounds after commissions, interest
rates and other charges were subtracted. As security for the repayment of the
loan, the Greek side had to mortgage all public lands and all public revenue.
In 1827, independent Greece’s first governor Ioannis Kapodistrias asked
the European allies for a new loan so as to meet the repayment of a part of
the previous loans and to help the recovery of the Greek economy. His
request, however, was turned down and the Greek government was forced to
declare bankruptcy in the same year.
At the time, Greece was reduced to a handful of provinces and islands
around Athens and Peloponnese. Its situation was similar to today, as Greece
was shut out of capital markets. Its “spreads” would skyrocket with the
slightest rumor, calculated on the backs of envelopes by money lenders in
muddy back alleys at the foot of the Acropolis.
Back in the 19th century, Germany, today’s thriving power, was not among
the money lenders. The debts were signed by France, the Netherlands, Russia
and the U.K. The Bavarian King Otto who was brought to Greece as King of
the Hellenes by the ‘protecting powers’ Britain, France and Russia,
contracted new loans of 60 million French francs. The first two installments
were mainly used for repaying the previous British debt and maintaining the
Bavarian army and bureaucracy. However, as the economy couldn’t recover,
the three powers refused to pay the third installment. Eventually Otto was
forced to declare bankruptcy.
The reign of Otto also saw the first financial restructuring of the Greek
state. The “phoenix,” the first Greek coin, was demonetized and replaced by
the “drachma,” which would be used for 169 years until replaced by the
euro.
During the following decades, despite developments in shipping and
industry, the public debt continued to grow, with the compensations paid to
the Ottomans for ceding Thessaly and Arta further increasing the debt. On
October 30, 1893, the Greek Prime Minister Charilaos Trikoupis stood
before parliament and exclaimed the historic sentence, “Unfortunately, my
dearest gentlemen, we went bankrupt.” It was the third consecutive
bankruptcy for Greece.
After the unsuccessful Greek-Turkish War of 1897, Greece was forced to
pay war reparations and get itself under international financial control.
From 1824 to 1897 Greece had contracted 10 foreign loans totaling 770
million francs, receiving though, only 464.1 million francs. The rest of the
amount was kept back for paying the issue price of the loans and other
commissions.
At the beginning of the next century Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos,
despite his successes in foreign politics, took up four external loans totaling
521 million francs. The new loans were used for servicing existing external
debt, for participating in the Balkan Wars and for incorporating the new
territories claimed after the war.
Prime Minister Venizelos was a lawyer by training. He had no training or
experience in building an economic engine to drive the Greek economy and
get Greece out of debt. He was a revolutionary bent on expanding Greek
territory by incurring more foreign debt and expending more Greek lives.
The Asia Minor catastrophe in 1922 forced Greece to accept one million
five hundred thousand refugees from the territories along the eastern side of
the Aegean Sea. In 1929, the Great Depression caused the fourth Greek
bankruptcy as the country was relying mainly on foreign capital, thus making
it vulnerable to international financial upsets. At the time, the Greek public
debt totaled 286.8 billion francs.
Thessaloniki, also known as Salonika, is today the second largest city in
Greece. This very old city is located at the northern end of the Aegean Sea.
This city was controlled by the Ottoman Turks until 1912. The population
was multi-ethnic. The city included a lot of Sephardic Jews who had been
forced out of Spain in 1492 by the Catholics. The Jewish population was
exterminated in the World War Two Nazi death camps. The city also was
strategically located as a trading center between southern Europe and the
Mediterranean countries. Mustafa Kemal, later known as Ataturk, the first
President of the Republic of Turkey, was born in Thessaloniki on May 19,
1881. The man who was later responsible for the defeat of the Greek Army
was born in what we now know as Greece, although Thessaloniki was
Ottoman Turkish territory at the time of his birth.
Mustafa Kemal attended military schools, and graduated from the Ottoman
Military College in Turkey in 1905. He served in a wide variety of military
positions and had considerable combat experience. His most famous
achievement was the defeat of the Allies in the Battle of Gallipoli. Gallipoli
controlled the access to Istanbul, and he was credited with saving the city.
His performance made him a national hero. He was never happy with the
politics of Turkey, and had a series of confrontations with higher government
authorities.
Mustafa Kemal was assigned to the Ninth Army in eastern Turkey. He
reached Samsun, Turkey, on May 19, 1919, 4 days after the Greek Army
landed at Smyrna, Turkey. In June he declared the independence of Turkey
was in danger. The attack by the Greek Army ignited the nationalist spirit of
the Turkish people. In July he resigned from the Ottoman Army. A warrant
was issued for his arrest. Then he was condemned to death. In September he
assembled a congress in Sivas, Turkey, which is south of Samsun and well
beyond the reach and control of the Sultan. The Turkish National Pact of
January 28, 1920, was declared with Mustafa Kemal as the leader. J.C.
Hurewitz, Diplomacy in the Near and Middle East, Volume II, (Princeton,
New Jersey: D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc,1956)
Mustafa Kemal instructed the Ottoman Turks in the Smyrna area to
withdraw to the interior rather than engage the Greek Army. His purpose was
to stretch out the supply lines of the Greeks, and to preserve his forces for a
battle later. The Greek Army became weary during its three year occupation
of Turkey, and was not properly supplied.
The Prime Minister of Greece in 1919 when the Greek army landed in
Turkey was Eleftherios Venizelos. His expertise was not in making military
decisions or based on battlefield experience, but his adversary, Mustafa
Kemal was well schooled and experienced in military matters..
King Constantine opposed the actions being taken by the Prime Minister.
The King had opposed Prime Minister Venizelos getting Greece involved
with World War One. The Prime Minister committed Greece to the Allied
side and Greek troops to battle. Some said the King’s opposition was based
on his family’s relationship to the Kaiser of Germany. That may be true, but
maybe the King recognized the folly of war. Whatever the motives, the King
was opposed. The population was split between Royalists supporting the
King and those supporting Venizelos. The Prime Minister made the decision
to land the Greek army in Turkey. King Constantine left Greece.
In 1920 Venizelos was defeated in the General Election. His opponents in
the election had promised to withdraw the troops from Turkey. After Prime
Minister Venizelos was defeated, King Constantine was recalled to govern
Greece. The expectation was he would withdraw the Greek military from
Turkey, but he did not. Many of the officers in the Greek Army in Turkey
were replaced with officers loyal to the King. The King, rather than
withdrawing from Turkey, continued on with the expansion in Turkey. The
King ignored the option of keeping Greece at peace as he had proposed in
arguments with Prime Minister Venizelos. That was one of the most fateful
decisions in Greek history. After being in the field in Turkey for three years
and as many as seven more in the Balkans many of the Greek soldiers just
wanted to return home to their families in Greece. The stage was set for a
Greek disaster.
Russia was going through the Bolshevik revolution and had lost interest
being Turkey’s adversary to the east. In 1921 the Russians and Nationalist
Government of Turkey signed the Treaty of Friendship. Turkey and Russia
dated the agreement on March 16, 1921, that fixed the border with Georgia,
Armenia and Azerbaijan. J.C. Hurewitz, Diplomacy in the Near and Middle
East, Volume II, Now Mustafa Kemal could turn his attention to the west to
force the Greek Army out of Turkey. As part of the agreement there was a
letter commitment from the Russians to provide the Turks with “more than
45,000 rifles, 300 machine guns, and nearly a hundred field guns, with
appropriate ammunition.” Andrew Mango, Ataturk: The Biography of the
Founder of Modern Turkey, (Woodstock, New York: The Overlook Press,
1999)
The invasion of Turkey by Greece in many ways helped to promote
Mustafa Kemal as the leader of the Turkish people. Most Greeks today are
not aware of this fact. If Greece had chosen the option of using their
formidable diplomatic skills, and had not put Greek soldiers on Turkish soil,
there would not have been a cause celebre. The Turkish people would not
have been rallied to an emotional cause. Greece would have enhanced its
position further, if Greece had opposed occupation of parts of Turkey by the
Italians, French and British. The Turks were uneducated and unorganized.
They lacked an industrial infrastructure. They were so weak as an
organization of people that even the Sultan was unable to impose his will on
the Turkish people. The Greeks could have created a partnership with the
Turkish people that would have led to the same practical result as raising the
Greek flag in Turkey, but without raising the flag. The Greeks could have
negotiated with the Turks to create local police departments for the good of
all to stop the violence that pervaded the country. Instead, the Greek
politicians created the greatest problem the Greek people faced from 1821 to
the present day.
The Greek politicians led with the weakness of Greece, and that was the
Greek economy and national debt. The economy supports the military. The
strength of Greece was its diplomatic skills, the one area where the Greek
politicians excelled. The Greek politicians did not consider their strength,
but instead selected a military invasion.
From the date of Greek independence until today, Greece has been plagued
by divisive politics and devoid of a leader to create an economic engine.
That engine is necessary to drive the economy of Greece to pay down the
debts and improve the standards of living for Greek citizens. The corruption
inherited from the Ottoman Turk era continues to drain the strength of the
economy in Greece. Today, the Greek economy depends on the shipping
inherited from the Ottoman Turk era, plus tourism. That is insufficient to meet
the needs of the Greek people. Most of all, the Greek people have been
betrayed by their leaders who have led the Greek people to death and ruin.