16. About the Author

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
R
oger Jennings graduated from Darien High School, Darien, Connecticut, in
1958, Ohio Wesleyan University in 1962 with a Bachelor of Arts degree, and
the Wharton Graduate Division of the University of Pennsylvania in 1968
with a Master of Business Administration.
At Ohio Wesleyan all students were required to attend chapel for one hour
three times a week for four years, and sit in an assigned seat so attendance
could be taken. All students were required to take religion, classical music,
philosophy and other liberal arts courses. At OWU alcohol was prohibited
and all female students were required to be in dorms by 10:30 pm.
Each of us believes from what we have experienced:
“But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut
thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth
in secret shall reward thee openly.” Matthew 6:6 King James Bible
Roger Jennings is the Grandson of Rev. Asa K. Jennings (AKJ), and son of
Asa W. Jennings, Esq. (AWJ). The widow of AKJ, Amy W. Jennings, gave
Roger boxes of papers left by AKJ. One author who inspected these papers,
Rifat N. Bali, wrote on p. 17 of his book The Saga of a Friendship: Asa
Kent Jennings and The American Friends of Turkey that he “copied close to
2500 pages” from these records.
Roger accompanied his Father on trips to Turkey, Europe and the Middle
East. Asa W. Jennings had many friends dating back to the 1920s who Roger
met and had the opportunity to observe. In addition, some friends assigned to
the U.N and others visited the family home in Darien, Connecticut. Those
experiences gave Roger an understanding of the history and people that are
part of this tragedy.
First and foremost, AWJ was a loyal American. However, he felt honored
to be able to help peoples of other countries achieve their aspirations,
including the Turks. That wish is shared by the Author as it was by AKJ. The
three of us are of one mind and spirit.
Various authors have asked for help from Roger when researching their
books on Smyrna. None have really identified, in my opinion, what the story
of Smyrna is really about or who Asa K. Jennings really was despite being
offered access to the family archives. Many people have asked me if or when
I would write a book about Smyrna. Since I have many unpublished
documents and unique information, I have decided to record what I know
about these tragic events. The Greek people deserve to know how they have
been betrayed by their leaders.