12. Captain Ioannis Theofanides

The Beloved Disciple John, when he wrote to the Seven Churches of Asia
from the island of Patmos, had this characteristic in mind concerning
Smyrna, in these words: ‘Be thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a
crown of life.’ (Revelations 1-10).
Why, then, did the Greek government have its Army go beyond the limits to
territorial expansion the Greeks had agreed to? Greece had the pearl of the
Mediterranean. Is that not beauty enough? Ego has no limit. Ego trumps logic.
Greek Admiral “Dannys” Theofanides, Grandson of the Greek hero
Captain Ioannis Theofanides, said in his home in Athens in 2013 that the
Greek military could have defended Smyrna and area immediately
surrounding Smyrna from the Turkish army. The mighty Greek navy could be
of no help when the fighting is 277 miles from Izmir, and the Greek army was
less effective with such long supply lines.
When the Greek troops entered Smyrna on May 15, 1919, the ethnic Greek
population celebrated. Greek flags were displayed. The Greek Orthodox
Metropolitan of Smyrna, Chrysostomos of Smyrna, blessed the first troops as
they arrived.
An inexperienced colonel was in charge of the operation and neither the
appointed High Commissioner nor high-ranking military individuals were
there for the landing resulting in miscommunication and a breakdown of
discipline. Most significantly, this resulted in the 1/38 Evzone Regiment
landing north of where they were to take up their post. As a result, they had to
march south passing a large part of the Greek celebratory crowds and the
Ottoman governor’s konak (official residence) and the barracks of Ottoman
troops.
Someone fired a shot and chaos resulted with the Greek troops firing
multiple shots into the konak and the barracks. The Ottoman troops
surrendered and the Greek regiment began marching them up the coast to a
ship to serve as a temporary prison. A British citizen at the scene claimed he
witnessed the shooting deaths by both Greeks in the crowd and Greek troops
of 30 unarmed surrendered prisoners during this march. British officers in the
harbor reported seeing Greek troops bayoneting multiple Turkish prisoners
during the march and then saw them thrown into the sea.