5. The Greek Army is Defeated

THE GREEK ARMY IS DEFEATED
P
rior to the Greek army landing in Turkey King Constantine and his
followers, the Royalists, opposed putting Greek troops in Turkey. The King’s
political opponent, Prime Minister Venizelos pressed ahead with the plan,
and King Constantine was forced to leave Greece. By 1920, the Greek
population turned against Venizelos and his Liberal Party. The United
Opposition won, and even Venizelos himself failed to retain his seat. The
United Opposition made the election a referendum on King Constantine I who
was very popular. The Greek army had been fighting for 10 years in the
Balkans and Turkey, and the population was war weary. The United
Opposition had promised to withdraw the army from Asia Minor and secure
peace with the Turks. With the defeat of Venizelos, King Constantine was
recalled and became in charge of the Greek government. Rather than
withdraw the Greek troops from Turkey, the King chose to press on with the
attack on Turkey.
Greek history was repeated in the 1964 U.S. Presidential elections. The
Republican, Barry Goldwater, said he would put 500,000 troops in Vietnam,
if elected. The Democrat, Lyndon Johnson, said he would pull the troops out
of Vietnam, if he was elected. The American people, like the Greeks of 1920,
wanted to stop the war and get the troops out of Vietnam. The U.S. voted
overwhelmingly in favor of Johnson, 42 million votes vs. 27 million for
Goldwater and 486 Electoral votes vs. 52 Electoral votes. Once Johnson
was elected, he did exactly what Goldwater had promised and flooded
Vietnam with U.S. troops. Turkey was the Vietnam of Greece.
*************
The Greek army enjoyed success as they moved further into the interior of
Turkey. With King Constantine as Supreme Commander of the Greek Forces,
the Greek army started an offensive on July 16, 1921. The Greek army
defeated the Turkish army at Eskisehir. The Greek army was 258 miles from
Izmir. The Turk in charge of the Turkish forces in the field was Ismet Inonu,
the trusted confidant of Mustafa Kemal. Inonu wanted to continue the fight,
and fight until the end. That is a characteristic of the Turkish persona. That
characteristic explains why Turks have been unsuccessful negotiating with
Greeks in places like Cyprus. But, Mustafa Kemal was a Turk like no other.
Mustafa Kemal overruled Inonu, and ordered him to withdraw despite
heavy losses. There was an option. Kemal wanted to preserve what was left
of the Turkish army, and mount a defense in a location where the Turkish
forces would have a tactical advantage. He chose the Sakarya River. This
location provided the last natural barrier to the Greek army conquering
Ankara, the capital of the National Government of Turkey. The Turkish
forces, with Mustafa Kemal in command, would have the high ground and be
in protected positions shooting down on the attacking Greek troops who had
no protection. The Turkish position would be similar to Gallipoli where the
weaker Turkish forces rained terror on the Allies during World War One, and
defeated the Allies. The Mustafa Kemal plan was successful, and the Greeks
were forced to retreat starting on September 14, 1921.
Mustafa Kemal returned to the capital, Ankara, in triumph where the Grand
National Assembly awarded him the rank of Field Marshal of the Army and
the title of Gazi. He was the hero of the Turkish people for saving their
nation. The miscalculation of King Constantine had helped to promote
Mustafa Kemal to legendary status.
The final decisive defeat for the Greek army was at the Battle of
Dumlupinar. Dumlupinar is 171 miles (276 km) from Smyrna (Izmir). The
Greek army of 200,000 was exhausted, hungry, mentally defeated. Most
soldiers just wanted to go home to Greece. The Turkish army of 104,000 was
highly motivated to drive the Greeks from Turkey despite lack of arms and
supplies. The Turks had surrendered all the territories of the Ottoman empire
like Syria, Iraq, and more, but they were determined not to surrender the
Motherland. The rallying call became “Turkey for the Turks.” Mustafa Kemal
ordered that the Greeks must be driven into the Aegean Sea. The Turkish
offensive started on August 26, 1922, and was over very quickly.
The Greek front line broke, and the retreat was a panic stricken,
disorganized event. The Greek officers under King Constantine did not
maintain discipline and organization during the retreat. Normally an army
would withdraw to a defensive line while most of the army and civilians
withdraw even further. There a second defensive line would be established
so that the first defensive line could withdraw to safety. Such a leap-frog
approach provides the best defense during a retreat. However, the Greeks
did not follow this standard approach. Many of the Greek soldiers just threw
down their arms to make travel easier as they started the long run and walk to
Smyrna. Some of the Greeks committed the worst atrocities. Turkish homes
were looted. Turks were raped and killed. Farms and homes were burned to
the ground. The advancing Turkish forces witnessed the destruction of the
Turkish people and property.
A British citizen, William Ferguson whose uncle was Dr. MacLachlan, the
President of the American International College in Paradise, was
interviewed after his rescue. His grandmother was born in Thessaloniki,
Greece. Mr. Ferguson said:
When the Greeks started retreating, the Turks had everything to their
advantage, because they had their own supplies nearby. The Greeks were
dependent on supplies coming up 200 miles from Smyrna and they didn’t
have their means of getting them up and they just got away as fast as they
could; got on any trains they could get and Greek refugees from the
villages along the railroad got on the trains and came down to Smyrna as
quickly as they could.
When the refugees started coming down on the train through Smyrna, the
weather had become very, very hot. It was September and we were having
dry winds. The boys, Jim and Douglas, and other boys around there, took
cans of water up to the train and gave the refugees water to drink, because
they were all gasping for water. Then in a day or two things were getting
worse. The Turkish armies were getting closer down and the Greek armies
retreating. Finally, the last Greek army seemed to have got stuck on the
way down and the Turkish army got in ahead of them and stopped them
when they were about five or ten miles up the railway line from Paradise.
On a Sunday we were sitting at dinner at our house about noon or one
o’clock when we heard quick firing from guns. Then the American Marine
officer (he means U.S. Navy) came over and told us to bring the family at
once over to the college, because it wasn’t safe to remain in the house. So
we got up and left dinner on the table, took our Greek servant along and
went over into the main building of the college, into the basement there,
and listened to the shells going over the college, back and forth between
the Greeks and the Turks. Finally that stopped and the Turkish army came
and camped all around the campus where we had about two or three
thousand refugees, Greeks and Armenians who had come in during the
previous two weeks for their protection.
Fortunately, Dr. MacLachlan was a very wise man and a good leader. He
had all the people searched for guns or knives or anything that could do
bodily harm and made a collection of these outside the engine room of the
college. When the Turkish army got to surround the campus, Dr.
MacLachlan took a Turkish boy with him, one of the students, and went out
and met the general in charge of the army and explained the situation. The
Turkish general apparently agreed that nothing would be done so long as
he knew no opposition would be shown by the refugees within the college
campus. Dr. MacLachlan gave him his word for that.
That Sunday night our family slept in the living room of the MacLachlan
house on the campus. I listened to the communication going on between the
sergeant, the Marine sergeant (actually, a petty officer of the U.S. Navy)
who was up on the tower of the college, and the lieutenant who was in
command down on the campus. They were exchanging messages. The
flagship, American flagship in the Smyrna Harbor, was sending up
messages by semaphore, whatever it was, to the campus, telling us what to
do.
The first thing in the morning I got out and climbed up to the top of the
college tower and looked around and saw little fires burning in the
vineyards all around. These had little houses for the caretakers to live in
and the Turks had evidentially got in there and had either chased out or
killed the caretakers and set fire to their homes. When I saw that I feared
the worst so I got down and contacted some of the American professors
who were going to go down by train to Smyrna to help treat the refugees
who had come down by the thousands and were all camped all along the
three mile key, right up to sea in Smyrna.
I asked them to contact the British Consul, to tell him our predicament.
They said they would. In about two hours the British Consul General, Sir
Harry Mann, came up in a certain passenger car with a Turkish guard and a
big Turkish flag on the hood and drove into the campus. I saw him and he
called me over and said ‘Where’s your family?’ “Get them together; get
them in here because we’ve got to take you down to Smyrna. I can’t spend
more than ten minutes here. Get them quickly.’ They were taken to the post
office.
On Wednesday morning I saw signs of fire up in what I thought was the
Turkish or Armenian quarter, up by the French railroad station. Two
officers from the British flagship came ashore and came up to the post
office and asked me if I could get them onto the roof so they could see
where the fire was. I saw what appeared to be the beginning of two fires.
Then the fire got nearer, nearer, and nearer. I was escorted and taken to the
British flagship which was out about two miles in the harbor and there
were thousands and thousands of refugees around at the time. Some of them
begged to be taken on board. They wouldn’t allow any and some of them
jumped and tried to swim alongside and they were forced off. A good
many were drunk.
Once on the British ship, I went down and washed up and came back up on
deck and by that time the fire, which had been close to the post office when
I left, had now got down as far as the key which was about another 100
yards so there was nothing between the sea, nothing to protect the refugees
who were there by the thousands from being injured by the flames from the
fire.
Then the various admirals of the different foreign fleets that were in the
harbor agreed to send boats to pick up refugees who were brought onto our
ship to find out what they wanted, where they wanted to go. I was glad to
be able to do a little interpreting for some of them but it was pretty
miserable. Children without parents, parents without children, women
without husbands. Didn’t know where they were.
Mr. Ferguson was taken with his family to Malta.
The New York Times on September 27, 1922, ran the story “Says Greeks
Burned and Pillaged Turkey.”
London, Sept. 26 – Strong criticism of the behavior of Greek troops in the
Near East was made by Viscount St. Davids, who presided today at the
semi-annual meeting of the Board of directors of the Ottoman Railway,
which operates from Smyrna to Aidan, in Asia Minor. The Viscount said:
The Greeks in their retreat burned every village they saw. They robbed
individual Turks, and when these resisted they killed them. They did all
this near the front and without military necessity. They did it out of sheer
maliciousness. Our reports are that it was done systematically by regular
troops under orders. It was done by the malice of men who knew they
could not hold the country and meant to make it worthless for any one else.
The Greeks took from Smyrna a number of leading Turks and deported
them to Athens, Viscount St. Davids declared.
’The Greeks deserved all they got and more,’ he said. ‘King Constantine’s
servants are very bad fighters, but they are first class at robbery, arson and
murder.’
The speaker said that the Greeks were now quiet, but that the Armenians
had resorted to bomb throwing and in many ways prompted the chances of
massacre.
With an army of 200,000, and a powerful Greek navy at their back, the
Greek army could have established a defensive line around Smyrna to protect
their prize and approximately 500,000 civilians. They did not. The soldiers
walked past Smyrna to Cesme, a town 54 miles (87 km) west of Smyrna.
There the soldiers boarded ships and returned to Greece. The Greek military
and politicians had lost complete control over the situation and their military.
The Greek military leaving Turkey to save their own lives and to return
home without regard to the risk to the civilians in the city of Smyrna was
disgraceful. After all the killing, destruction and rapes committed by the
Greeks, the civilian population in Smyrna was at great risk. The first Turks to
reach Smyrna were the chetahs. They were irregular, wild and undisciplined
soldiers whose motivation was looting, raping and killing. There was no
organized government force in the city to prevent the worst conduct. In the
Armenian community of Smyrna a voluntary group was formed to resist and
fight back, but they were too few and too weak to secure the safety of the city.
From a report written by Asa K. Jennings for Mrs. Emmons Blaine:
Not only was the Greek army not prepared for this, but the nearly half a
million people living in Smyrna were also not prepared. The population of
Smyrna consisted not only of Greeks, Armenians and Turks, but of Italians
and English and various other European nationalities. American
educational and philanthropic institutions as well as business interests
were found there.
It was in August that we heard of the break, and not long after we began to
see retreating Greek soldiers coming into Smyrna. Their numbers
increased until the later part of August and the first of September in 1922
when Greek and Armenian civilians as well as Greek soldiers were taking
leave of Smyrna as fast as available ships would permit.
Greeks Hand Over Smyrna to Allies
At last came the main army of the Greeks. They were being pushed by the
oncoming victorious Turkish army; but in their disastrous retreat the
Greeks unfortunately burned the villages and cities through which they
came, and caused their compatriots or the so-called Christian populations
to leave their homes and to flee with them to the sea.
Terrible stories are current in Smyrna of the condition of the Turkish
people resulting from the treatment by the Greek army during the retreat.
We have heard only what happened to Christian women and girls at the
hands of the Turkish soldiers, but it is equally true that these same things
happened to Turkish women and girls by so called Christian armies.
Maddened by what they saw, the oncoming Turkish army was prepared for
the eventualities about which many of us in America have read only one
phase.
As Americans, however, we were not interested in the political situation
as such, but we were interested in the great humanitarian needs that
developed then in Smyrna, with the hordes of refugees that had poured in
from every quarter, and the precarious conditions of these people upon the
arrival of the Turkish army, with the state of mind already described.
Many expected dire things to happen the first day that the Turkish troops
entered, which was September 9, 1922.
I happened to be one of the many who were standing on the quay at Smyrna
when the first of the Turkish troops entered, and I must say that the entry
was accomplished in a most orderly way, and although when the first of
the troops entered Smyrna bombs were thrown and several were killed,
they did not halt or seek vengeance, but marched on to their destination
which was the government and military headquarters in the city of Smyrna.
Asa Jennings and his family had been transferred by the YMCA (Young
Men’s Christian Association) during August to Smyrna from Czechoslovakia
to be the Boys’ Work Secretary. He knew no one. He had never been to
Turkey or Greece, and spoke no Greek or Turkish. The family moved into a
house at the International College in the Paradise suburb of Smyrna known
today in Turkish as Sirinyer. Upon his arrival, the YMCA employee senior to