6. The American Relief Committee

Asa, E. O. “Jake” Jacob, left on vacation. Asa was in charge of Y
operations.
During August when the developing humanitarian crisis was obvious, Asa
formed the American Relief Committee. The members were all Americans.
Professor Caleb Lawrence was the agreed upon Chairman. Committees were
formed for different functions. One of the members worked for Standard Oil.
Each was asked to do what he could. Asa had the YMCA Chevy. So he was
appointed to gather flour and fuel to feed the growing masses. Giving each
person an assignment was Asa’s method of leadership to get people involved
and committed.
Darius A. Davis was Senior Secretary for Europe for the Young Men’s
Christian Associations of North America located in Geneva, Switzerland.
Sarah C. Jacob, wife of described “Jake” Jacob wrote the following letter to
D.A. Davis to describe the escalating crisis in Smyrna. Athens, September
14th, 1922:
Dear Mr. Davis,
Last night at 8 o’clock, Philip and I with other American families left
Smyrna on the American Destroyer Simpson. As we left, Smyrna was
burning–a bank of flames in the rear, fanned by a strong wind toward the
sea; the sea in front, the quay all along the water-front, absolutely packed
with people, stretching their arms to heaven and the few boats in the
harbor. God grant that it may not have been the Turkish plan to surround
and finish all that night. Jake, Jennings, Fisher and all the Paradise men
remained. Also, I think, the two YWCA Secretaries.
Jake asked that as quickly as possible I get off to you a full report of all
that has happened and what they have tried to do in the way of relief. I
shall relate only what I have seen, or know to be absolute facts. What Jake
and I have seen is typical of what has gone on everywhere.
Jake was finishing his second week of vacation at Phocia Saturday,
September 2nd, when rumors began to float about that the Phocia
population was fearing “chettas” (brigands). Jake went to talk with the
Mayor and the Chief of Police and learned that there had really been some
disaffection in the Greek army, and that Afion Kara Hissar had fallen and
the army was retreating, but that everyone expected it to stop at the line of
the Sevres Treaty. Smyrna people who came up for Sunday reported some
panicky feeling in the city, and fear that our Phocia boats might be
requisitioned. But an assuring letter of Friday from Mr. Jennings made us
feel that unless we receive telegraphic word from him there was no reason
for leaving until the end of the week, as we had planned, as we know that
we could, if necessary, take a sail boat to Smyrna.
Monday, September 4th. The regular Monday morning boat passed Phocia
without stopping, leaving families stranded on the quay. We supposed it
was requisitioned. Yet, to our surprise and, at first, relief, we saw it turn
into Phocia on schedule and return on time Monday night at ten thirty. Jake
and Mr. Birge went out to it for news from Smyrna. (We had taken a five or
six mile walk up into the mountains at sunset and everything was so quiet
and normal that we could not believe that there was much anxiety. The
farmers and villagers were in their homes and no apparent excitement).
There were no direct messages on the boat to any of us – there were in
Phocia Americans from the YMCA, the ACI (American Collegiate
Institute) and the International College. However, a young Englishman – a
stranger to most of us – was on board claiming to be the bearer of a
message to all of us. It was that the morale of the Greek army was
completely broken, the soldiers were throwing their arms and running, and
refugees were pouring into the city, and the Turks might be there in a week.
Thinking that there would be no other regular boat from Phocia, he had
helped to get the promise of a British war boat to come down next morning
and bring British and Americans with hand baggage – but no servants nor
other people. He claimed that Dr. Reed and Mr. Jennings had helped make
these arrangements. Yet we Americans hardly know how much to believe
was actually true and how much might be due to the excitability of this
particular man. However, on learning that the regular Tuesday morning
boat was coming in at eleven that night and leaving at three or four in the
morning, we all got our servants ready with such trunks, etc., as they could
look after and put them on the boat. When Jake came back from the first
trip to it, he said ‘Had we not better try to make it too?’ ‘While we are not
sure of this man’s report, it is evident that I am needed in Smyrna and that
war boat may not come.’ Surely God was guiding his thoughts. It was one
o’clock; the boat was to sail at four. Our house was furnished with our
own things which must be packed and there was a lot of YMCA camp
material still to be put into the store room which would not be open till
morning. But we went to work to get off with our servants and our
Secretary, Coronopoulos, at least all our goods we could. At two-thirty,
when Jake started again to the steamer, I said ‘if you can persuade the boat
to wait until five we can all make it.’ It promised to do so. The YMCA
material and key to the store house was left with a reliable man to be put
away in the morning. At four-forty the Birge family and ours – the last of
the Americans in Phocia – got on the steamer just as it was pulling up
anchor.
Tuesday, September 5th. We reached Smyrna about nine o’clock. The city
was in panic. Foreign war boats were in the harbor – British, French and
Italian. Refugees had been pouring in for two days. The streets were full of
carts, wagons, vehicles all kinds that could carry anything – all loaded
with goods the fleeing families were trying to get to steamers. The quay
was so packed with the baggage and people that our boatmen searched
some time to find a place wide enough to let us pass out single file. By
more good luck and a fancy price Jake and Birge found two Arabs to take
our stuff to our homes. Needless to say, there were no pass-port
formalities.
On reaching the Y building about ten-thirty, Jake found already in session
an American Committee organizing for relief. If I understand correctly, Mr.
Jennings was instrumental in getting this started, but the whole American
colony was co-operating. At the organization that day, Professor Lawrence
became Chairman and sub-committees were formed. Jake naturally
remained in the city with Mr. Jennings in this work all day. The YMCA
building was chosen as headquarters for the Relief Work. Mr. Fisher, who
was on vacation in Constantinople, was telegraphed for.
Philip and I went out to Paradise on the 12.30 train. On the way we met
one refugee train coming in. Two others passed our home in the afternoon.
I found a big ‘kazan’ and half a dozen Standard Oil tins of water inside my
gate. The college boys, under one of the tutors – Mr. Moremon – had
organized a ‘water brigade’ to relieve the thirst of the hot refugees as the
trains stopped at our station. Five to seven trains had passed our home
each day since Sunday. Mrs. Caldwell counted fifty-four cars on one train.
All were about the same length. The box cars were filled with goods and
the refugees sitting, or hanging, on top, wherever there was an inch of
space. The cattle cars were packed with people. Jake said the other
railway was bringing in refugees in the same manner. Along the Boudjah-
Smyrna road I saw all day a steady stream of arabas laden with goods or
people, moving towards Smyrna. Shepherds driving their flocks or cattle
toward Smyrna kept passing constantly. Among all the refugees were
goodly numbers of soldiers, so we realized that the troops were indeed
fleeing. The city began to fill up with soldiers.
Wednesday, September 6th. This condition continued much the same all
Wednesday forenoon, but in the afternoon there were fewer trains and less
traffic in every way. People seemed easier and more hopeful. Some native
families that had planned to leave came back to their homes – among them
two of the college families.
The Relief Work took more definite form. Professor Lawrence asked Jake
to serve with him as Associate Director and together they got in touch with
all the authorities to see what was most needed and where they could best
help. It was evident that the Greek High Commission was to leave in a few
days at most. The High Commission rented to Professor Lawrence and
Jake for ‘a sum that seemed just to both parties’ (which was in reality five
liras handed over by Jake) the Greek Orphanage at Boudjah, and left with
the American Consulate twenty thousand pounds for its maintenance. Mr.
Moreman of the International College was made Director, went there at
once to live and hoisted the American flag. The orphans and equipment
from places in the city were transferred to this orphanage. There were
already over two hundred and fifty there. The next day the International
College received this from Professor Lawrence and Jake assumed
responsibility for the work. Other orphanages in the city were taken over
in a similar manner. The Greek Military Authorities also turned over any
cantonments that could be used for refugees. It was not possible, however,
to fly the American flag over any of these, as they would lawfully be
considered military spoils by the Turks. Mr. Jennings was in charge of the
Committee on supplies and was taking measures to ensure a bread supply,
by arranging for flour, fuel and ovens. Mr. Yantes of the Tobacco Co. was
in charge of a transportation Committee and Mr. Griswold, another
business man, of another Committee which I cannot for the moment recall.
Professor Caldwell, assisted by Mr. Hulse of the Standard Oil, was
Treasurer. So you see how the American Community as a whole was back
of this Relief Work.
Thursday, September 7th. Throughout Thursday the situation remained
much the same as to refugees and general feeling, but towards evening
there was greater tension and anxiety again. They began marching the army
out of the city for embarkation at Cesme. The troops came for the most part
up the main Smyrna-Boudjah Road, crossing the fields just before the
Birge’s house and striking to the road past the aqueducts. Some, however,
came to the main turn and down past the station and our house. We were all
naturally anxious over the interim between the leaving of one army and the
arriving of the other. We feared the brigands.
Thursday, about midnight, a special train was sent to Boudjah with orders
to bring to the city all British subjects. The next morning the village was
naturally panic stricken.
It was this day – or else Friday morning – (one day has been so like the
other for ten days it is hard to recollect exactly) that an American
Destroyer from Constantinople arrived, bringing Mr. Fisher, and also a
Relief party from there – Captain Hepburn, personally representing
Admiral Bristol, Major Davis of the Red Cross, Mr. Jacquith and Mr. (left
blank) of the Near East Relief, and two Red Cross nurses. Finding the
Americans already organized they showed a splendid spirit in fitting into
what was started. The local Committee ‘remained in being’ for the present,
but for working purposes revamped itself into a larger form. Major Davis
was asked to be Chairman, with several Departments under him – Relief,
Transportation, etc. Just how the responsibilities were placed, I cannot
say, as I saw very little of Jake from this on. I know that every American
was ‘on the job’ to his or her full strength. The British, asked by the Greek
Government to give relief, felt free by that request to join in and were also
helping. Funds had been solicited by our Committee from the very first,
and the request was answered by a hearty response from all sources.
Trains now began to be very irregular. You know our transportation
problem at best. Our own car in town and the College car at Paradise had
been of inestimable help from Tuesday on. At this time two other cars
were secured by the Relief Committee and all were in constant use. The
going from place to place to investigate conditions and needs, the calling
upon different officials for permissions and requests for help, etc., etc.,
were made possible only by the cars.
Friday, September 8th. Friday the Greek officials were loaded on the
Greek battleships in the harbor and all the Greek boats steamed out of the
harbor in the evening. In the afternoon Jake called at the High Commission
on business, secured entrance by a back door, but found the building
absolutely empty. The Greek Army was still leaving the city.
Three American Destroyers were now in the harbor, as well as other boats
of other nationalities. American sailors, thoroughly armed were placed on
guard at all American property where requested. We all ‘requested’. From
ten to twenty were placed at the ACI and the YWCA in town and at the
International College at Paradise. Four were at the YMCA, and others at
the Standard Oil Co. and elsewhere. The Consulate naturally had a strong
guard. And I want to say right here that throughout the whole time we have
all had reason to be very proud of our sailor boys. For courage, bravery
and unselfish service they cannot be outdone. They have, without
exception, proven that in time of crisis our American sailors are ‘right
there’. Of our Paradise group at this time two were stationed at the Birge
home, one at ours, and the rest about the College gates and camps. With a
mop stick for a flag pole, I, for the first time, hoisted my American flag
from the balcony window, and later a second one from the rear window.
All this day refugees had been frantically fleeing again toward the city.
More than on any previous day were all byways crowded with arabas,
flocks, herds, people in carts and on foot, all pushing toward the city. It
was estimated that over a hundred thousand were already in the city.
People began seeking refuge in the College grounds. My servants’ families
begged and received refuge in my home – twelve in all. Neighbors kept
bringing boxes to the College and also to me for safety. We accepted what
came. At night Jake reported a comparatively quiet city, but great anxiety.
At Paradise sniping for loot had gone on more or less all day. Turkish
Orotan brigands were in the hills near us and were doing most of the
shooting. Yet Friday night we all slept in our own homes. In the night we
were wakened by a great noise of calling and shouting back and forth. It
proved to be only a company of Greek soldiers preparing for an hour’s
rest outside our gate and in the empty lots about. All were gone by morning
and no harm done. We had feared the retreating, demoralized army, as well
as the brigands and the arriving Turkish army. But the Greeks were too
frightened and too hurried, in our part of the country, at least to cause any
disturbance.
Saturday, September 9th. Saturday morning Greek troops continued to
march by our home. Refugees continued fleeing towards the city. About
eleven o’clock came the word that the Turks were in the city – ‘a peaceful
occupation’. The straggling groups of Greek soldiers still coming along,
and the refugees bound for Smyrna were petrified. All were throwing their
guns or begging people to take them. For a time, according to instructions,
and following the example of the College, I received the guns handed to
me, first letting our sailor guard make sure they were unloaded. One had
been thrown to us loaded with four bullets and cocked!! But after a time it
was evident that this policy was impossible. Too many were coming, and
our officer commanded that fire-arms must no longer be thrown on
American property. He came in person and assisted in throwing over the
fence what was being thrown in. For some moments, however, it came in
faster than could be thrown out. But order soon reigned again, and the
station master granted permission for guns to be thrown into an empty
freight car standing on the switch outside our gate. There were at least a
hundred guns in a few minutes. A train was expected up every minute
bearing Turkish soldiers – hence the great panic to get guns out of sight.
For a time a group of refugees almost stampeded our gate, so determined
were they to get in under the American flag, but I had taken all our officer
would allow, and there were so many more than I could possibly help.
Finally they camped down in the open space between our house and the
station and around the outside of our fence. The College had accepted all
that was allowed at that time. Fleeing Greek soldiers knowing that they
would be shot on sight of their uniform were frantic. I threw out all of
Jake’s old clothes for civilian attire. After the first train had passed with a
few Turkish soldiers inside, things quieted down. Our sailor quietly
walked about our premises to make sure that everything was all right. He
picked up five or six hand grenades and a few other things that were more
or less dangerous that had been dropped by the frantic people.
Sniping and looting by the Cretan brigands continued worse than the day
before. Several refugees seeking shelter outside of the College walls near
the Harlow House were killed. Our sailors said that they had good aim.
They would pick off men here and there about the walls, but carefully
avoid the spots where the sailors stood, although once or twice a shot
whizzed through the trees just over the sailors’ heads. Once one whizzed
over our vineyard and sent our refugees scurrying into the house. People
from the College could see houses in the village across being looted. So
far, the American flag had been respected. But the Birge family, being so
far from the rest of us and being so exposed, moved into the College
building, and consequently the American guard was withdrawn from there.
Our house, being such a fortress in itself, so near the College, and on such
a strategic corner for keeping track of what was going on, our officer
preferred to have us stay in our house, so that he could keep a guard there.
We preferred to stay.
Jake and Mr. Jennings came out about dusk. Fisher was spending the nights
at the Y since his arrival. Jake said they saw forty or fifty dead bodies on
their way out, but the killing this day seemed to be mostly for loot. It was
the boys and shepherds with their flocks about the city or the poor refugees
caught with their goods on the way to Smyrna who had suffered.
Jake, with Major Davis, Mr. Jacquith and others, had been to see the
Turkish Commander who was temporarily in charge to put the situation
before him and got permission for Relief work. “Wait until tomorrow” was
the general attitude, and our workers were rather discouraged. That night
we all went to bed anxious for the morrow ‘hoping against hope’ that the
promise of the Turkish officials, that all would be quiet as soon as the
regular troops arrived might prove true.
Mustafa Kemal was at all times well informed about the operations of his
troops, and often even minor decisions had to be made by him. So the Turkish
Commander could have been requesting permission. The Americans at the
time would not have known how Mustafa Kemal controlled his troops.
That night I sheltered thirty-six refugees. We fed such as we had little food.
The story of these thirty-six would give a side-light on the suffering of all
the refugees, but I fear there is neither space nor time to tell that now. We
had all opened our homes to the limit to refugees – making sure of only one
thing, that none had fire arms of any kind. The American Collegiate
Institute (ACI) had over twelve hundred, the YWCA nearly two hundred,
the YMCA ninety, (their small available space made it necessary to limit
their refuge to members only), the International College over a thousand.
Looting and shooting was bad all night.
Sunday, September 10th. I was out in the yard at six-thirty Sunday morning
giving coffee to our sailor guard, when we saw the regular Turkish Infantry
marching towards Smyrna on the Boudjah-Smyrna Road. Cavalry troops
had been passing our house more or less all night. We watched the infantry
at the corner we saw groups of five or six drop out of line, break into all
the houses on the corner, come out laden with all they could carry and drop
back into the marching column. My heart sank. We had been promised
order ‘when the Regulars came’. This was the ‘order’,–the Regular troops
with their officers. One officer told the chief or our sailor guard that the
troops had orders to gather supplies for the hospitals as they came along!!
‘Of course, they may disturb some other things as well, but this is war’
was the officer’s excuse. The Turkish guards placed at our corner this day
robbed our little old grocer, as he passed them to slip into his house for
some clothes. They also demanded fifteen pounds ‘baksheesh’ from some
poor refugees who came with College carts to get their belongings left
outside our gate. Fortunately, friends interceded and prevented this
robbery. The looting and killing increased throughout the day. Jake saw
wagons backed up to the big shops being filled by looters. Regulars and
irregulars and civilians were all having a full share in it all. One of the
worst quarters was in the immediate vicinity of General Military
Headquarters. They seemed to ‘have it in for’ the Armenians especially.
We could not learn why. No attention was paid to any flag. The Birge
house was broken into and considerable carried off, while three American
flags wave on the premises, but the looters ran on sight of the American
sailor galloping up. What could not be carried off, in most homes, was
knocked to pieces and left. Birge’s piano and heavy furniture met this
fate.” Mustafa Kemal, still with the Ottoman soldier temperament, looked
on this as “pay back in war.” This is the price the Greeks and Armenians
will have to pay for their past behavior. He knew of this misbehavior and
was content to let it continue.
About one o'clock we heard firing near by. At three I received word to
come at once to the College. A sailor led the way, my thirty-six refugees
and my family followed, guarded by a second sailor in the rear. The firing
proved to be a battle between some Greek troops in the valley trying to
make the embarkation point and Turks on Mt. Pagus. The College was just
in the midst, and fearing bad results from a stray or miscalculated shot, our
officer called all families into the main college building. For two hours we
watched the battle, the firing passing over our heads. Then all was quiet.
We could not tell whether the Greeks had been taken prisoner or escaped. I
left my refugees at the College, but our family and servants returned to our
home for supper and the night, again feeling that "tomorrow will be
better". But throughout the night we heard frequent shooting and pathetic
screaming of women out the Boudjah way. In the morning it was reported
that the poorer section of Boudjah had been looted, many killed and girls
carried off. This was the region where my servants’ fathers and brothers
had stayed by their homes. We have been able to get no word about them
yet. During this day and the next we could see villages all about being
burned.
Monday, September 11th. Monday was passing comparatively quietly,
though I kept my suitcase packed in case of a hurried call to College or to
town. Suddenly, about five o’clock, one of the College boys came with a
note from our officer telling me to come at once by the shortest path. We
grabbed our suitcases and went. Everyone at the College was nervous and
excited. Dr. MacLachlan had seen looters in the Settlement House, and
feeling confident that if he could talk with them and explain that it was
American property that they would leave it alone, he had persuaded our
officer and seven of his sailors all armed to go with him in the College car
to the scene. He began to explain to the looters. They turned on him, took
his watch and money, stripped him and beat him and would have shot him
had not a Turkish student, who had gone with him, thrown himself in front
of the gun and persuaded the men not to shoot. The American officer seeing
the situation hopeless – looters, heavily armed, far outnumbered the
Americans – sent his men back and remained alone with Dr. MacLachlan.
He also was striped, his gun, watch and money taken, and himself beaten
badly. The whole group were covered by the guns of the band, and the
feeling was strong, even on the part of our calm, level-headed officer, that
all would have been killed had not a young Turkish officer almost
miraculously appeared on the scene. He unarmed and with only a riding
whip, ordered the men away and they obeyed. It is only one of the many
instances that made us realize that the officers did not care to stop the
awful things that were happening. Dr. MacLachlan has been in bed since,
but is recovering.
Tuesday, September 12th. That night – Monday – was the most trying. Ever
since Saturday a reliable Turkish guard had been repeatedly promised, but
did not come. This night, realizing that the American flag, American
property and American life meant nothing to these people, all the
American families slept together in the upper dormitory of the College.
They were anxious hours. In the night a ‘Turkish Guard’ of about twenty
men rode into the Campus – the wildest, fiercest looking Turks I have ever
seen, dressed not in uniform but quite evidently in clothes robbed as they
came along. We are all confident they were nothing more than brigands.
They were housed in the Gymnasium until morning and our sailors quietly
kept guard over the ‘guards’. But these were our ‘protection’ until Tuesday
noon, when after repeated insistence an officer appeared. While the officer
was on the place all looting about the community ceased, but five minutes
after he left with Dr. Reed to report to his Commander in Smyrna, we
could see a steady stream of looters going into the houses – including the
Birge’s – all about, loading their backs, their animals, their wagons, and
going up the hill toward the Turkish quarter of the city. When the officer
returned all was quiet again. About five o’clock the officer received his
promised 120 men in regular uniform and stationed them about the
community as guards. The four at our corner demanded coffee and ‘raki’ of
me first thing. Fortunately I had the first, if not the latter. They may have
been all right, but I felt safer when our officer said our sailor might guard
inside instead of outside our house that night. I did not like to trust our
sailor to four of these fellows. However, everything seemed to quiet down
and we all had a fair night’s sleep in our own house. This had been a long
day for Jake. He and Birge left the College at five-thirty to report to the
military authorities the Paradise incident regarding Dr. MacLachlan and to
insist on an officer and guard. He had spent the day in the city, returning
with Jennings at dusk. All the Relief workers were getting more and more
discouraged and pessimistic, as the Turkish officials continued to put off,
or turn aside, or promise and not do. Our workers did what they could in
places like the Colleges, Orphanages, the YMCA, the YWCA etc. But it
was evident that work would be hampered as much as possible by the
authorities. One man, however, the Governor of the city, seemed really
anxious to cooperate. The Military Commander, Noureddin, on the other
hand did not even return the salute of Capt. Hepburn.
Wednesday, September 13th. To us, at Paradise, Wednesday seemed fairly
quiet and secure with our apparently friendly Turkish officer in charge, so
we were somewhat surprised when Prof. Lawrence and Mr. Jennings
brought word at noon for all women and children to be ready by three
o’clock to be taken to town and put on an American Destroyer. Several of
us were loathe to obey. The first order was that only Americans could go
and they only with hand baggage. Later, the Captain of one of our boats
came and said, while permission could not be given if asked, he thought if
we asked no questions we could get on all we took with us belonged in our
house holds. Such was the case. All our servants and all school boys and
girls that we took into our families went on with us without question. Some
Greek families of the College were accepted without question.
Jake and our sailor chauffeur on the ride to the city kept indicating when
we must look down and close our eyes. I could not always obey. I saw the
chauffeur swerve the car to avoid bumping over one dead man in the
middle of the road. The awful stench told the story the rest of the time.
There evidently had been no burying parties since Saturday. We were
gathered at the Smyrna Theater, the headquarters for Americans, and sent
off by tens in the little motors of the Destroyer. Birge, Jake and Jennings
had come to the Theater to help the families off. We waved them good-bye,
reached the destroyer and turned to see fires blazing up in four places.
They were started in the Armenian quarter, near the Turkish quarter with a
strong wind blowing away from the Turkish quarter. We steamed out the
fire had become one mass, a mile or more long, and the picture described
at the beginning imprinted itself forever on our minds.
Smyrna Burning, 14 Americans Missing
George Horton was the U.S. Consul and senior diplomat of the United
States in Smyrna. He was married to a Greek woman and loved Greece. He
was well connected, but failed to use the prestige and position of the United
States to intercede between the Turkish Nationalists and Greeks, or to
provide food, shelter, medical care or protection for the helpless Greeks,
Armenians and Jews. He abrogated his responsibility as a diplomat like the
other diplomats in Smyrna. He boarded a U.S. destroyer this date, and sailed
off to safety leaving behind Vice Consul Maynard Barnes and members of the
Consul staff. The staff, like the volunteer relief workers from the American
community, all risked their lives and stayed on the job until the rescue was
completed, but George Horton ran. He was a coward. When he got to Athens
he tried to convince the world that he was the savior of the Greeks, and his
daughter has continued with that propaganda for the next 90 years.
This date, the 13th, is significant for other reasons. Asa Jennings had
arrived in Turkey on August 16. August 19th, his boss, Jake, left for two
weeks of vacation. That meant Asa was in charge of the Y. The very next day,
the 20th of August, the Greek line broke and the crisis started. By the 9th of
September, the Turkish Army was in Smyrna. All during this period up to
September 13th, George Horton did nothing on behalf of the Greeks and
Armenians, but he was the person who should have acted. When he left
Smyrna on the 13th, then Asa was free of any suggestion that he should work
through diplomatic officers. The diplomats had not approached the Turkish
leaders, and the situation was getting worse. The fire was the turning point.
Asa later wrote that he was overcome on September 20th, his birthday, with
an uncontrollable desire to get ships. That is when he went to see the Turkish
leader, Mustafa Kemal, who people feared, in order to get an agreement to
get ships. This is the same Asa K. Jennings who told his wife back in 1906
that he cannot die like the doctors said he would, because he had a great
mission to accomplish.
Eyewitness Story of Smyrna’s Horror
Continuing with the letter from Sarah Jacob to D.A. Davis of the
International YMCA:
Thursday, September 14th. We are in Athens, hourly awaiting further news.
I can see no possible hope that any building in all the main part of the city
can be saved. God grant that something may protect the people until rescue
can reach them.
I have written in this diary-like form, trying to picture the rising tension as
it came to us. I have told only what we experienced and saw as I had not
exact facts of the other scenes, but I do know others in the city saw far
worse scenes than I did. Miss Mills at the ACI was in the thickest of it.
She tells of the massacring and torturing that went on in the Armenian
section, of the men shot down and chopped to pieces under the American
flags of the College, of the terror when the ACI was burning and the doors
had to be opened and the refugees told to flee to the quay and of the
shooting that began immediately. She tried to keep her few girls and
teachers together, but it was impossible in the throngs, and each had to go
as best she could. Miss Mills knew not whether they reached safety or not.
It was impossible to find out. And so goes story after story of every one,
these terrible ten days. But the Americans, each where duty called, have
stood by the Relief work night and day and have done all that was in their
power to do.
We have all experienced as never before the trusting of our dear ones to
God, and praying – yes, that they may be safe – but still more that they –
and we – may be given wisdom to know our duty and courage to do it at
any cost.
Sincerely yours,
Signed – Sarah C. Jacob.
P.S. Monday, September 18th. Several other boats from Smyrna have now
arrived. Miss Christie of the YWCA was aboard one of the boats. She
reports that all the teachers and all but two of the Orphanage students of
the ACI are saved on her boat; also all the YWCA staff girls except one.
Mr. Birge helped many of these to get aboard. She saw Jake on the shore,
throwing people into the little boats. All the American boats in the harbor
were taking on refugees, also some British boats. Italian and French boats
were taking on only their own subjects. However, the Italian boat arriving
last night brought refugees of all nationalities.
Our Paradise Doctor, Dr. Lerando, came with us, but his brother, passing
as an Italian, arrived on the Italian boat on Friday. He estimates that
200,000 people were still on the quay. No more Paradise people have yet
arrived and no definite word has been received from them. Several report,
Miss Christie among others, how people were throwing themselves into
the sea and trying to swim to boats. Some were taken up by the boat hooks;
some found naked were rolled in blankets as soon as received.
One of the wealthy men of Smyrna, away on business in Dantzic, hurried
home on a telegraphic message from his family, found the city burning and
was brought to Athens, frantic about his mother and sister. The sister had
been seen, captured by the Turks and being carried to the mountains.
Yesterday he found her on one of the refugee boats; she had escaped the
Turks, threw herself into the sea, and was pulled, naked, into the boat. We
have supplied her with clothes. This is a story of many similar cases.
We are organizing relief at this place and constantly awaiting news from
Smyrna. The city is reported to be burnt from the Customs House to the
point, including the Government buildings. Of course, the YMCA and
YWCA are gone. S.C.J.
From the letters and records of Amy W. Jennings, wife of Asa K. Jennings:
A price had been set by the Sultan upon the head of Kemal as the leader of
this Turkish revolution; therefore, his followers were struggling not only
for the independence of Turkey but for their very lives.
In August 1922 the news reached Mr. Jennings and other Americans in
Smyrna that the Turkish Nationalists had broken through the Greek lines
and were forcing the Greek Army to the sea, and that the Greek soldiers in
their disastrous retreat were burning villages and cities behind them and
compelling the Christian population of Greeks and Armenians to flee with
them. These hordes of soldiers and refugees passed Mr. Jennings’ home, as
the American College was in the direct line of retreat. He was a witness to
the occupation of Smyrna by the Turkish Army, and to the burning of
Smyrna, and many of the horrors and tragedies which ensued.
One of the more sordid events of the Turkish conquest was the killing of
Greek Orthodox Metropolitan Chrysostomos of Smyrna. There was no doubt
that he had blessed the Greek troops upon their invasion of Turkey and had
urged them on at every turn. He was a vocal Greek partisan.
Smyrna came under the rule of the butcher of Smyrna, Turkish General
Noureddin Pasha. Noureddin reported to Mustafa Kemal, both Ottoman
generals, and was accountable to Mustafa Kemal. Any act by Noureddin had
to be responsive to the orders and intent of Mustafa Kemal. Kemal allowed
Noureddin and Turks to vent their wrath against the Greeks and, most
notably, their leader, the Metropolitan. The barbarian acts of those Ottoman
Turks would be abhorrent to the Turks of today. If Greeks, and the rest of the
world today, understand how the Turks have changed, then reconciliation can
begin, and that could help the Greeks.
On September 9, 1922, soon after the Turkish army had moved into
Smyrna, a Turkish officer and two soldiers took Chrysostomos from the
office of the cathedral and delivered him to the Turkish commander-in-chief,
Noureddin Pasha. The general decided to hand him over to a Turkish mob
who murdered him.
According to French soldiers who witnessed the lynching but were under
strict orders from their commanding officer not to intervene: ‘The mob took
possession of Metropolitan Chrysostomos and carried him away...a little
further on, in front of an Italian hairdresser named Ismail...they stopped and
the Metropolitan was slipped into a white hairdresser’s overall. They began
to beat him with their fists and sticks and to spit on his face. They riddled
him with stabs. They tore his beard off, they gouged his eyes out, they cut off
his nose and ears.’
Bishop Chrysostomos was then dragged (according to some sources, he
was dragged around the city by a car or truck) into a backstreet of the Iki
Cheshmeli district where he died soon after.
On September 13, 1922, the day the American families left Smyrna for the
safety of Greece my Grandmother Amy Jennings’ last image of Asa while
looking at him from the safety of an American destroyer was Asa
disappearing into a crowd of people going off to do what he could to relieve
the suffering of so many helpless people.
My Father Asa W. Jennings spoke of that day driving in the Y (YMCA)
Chevy from Paradise to the port of Smyrna. My Grandfather Asa K. Jennings
was driving and had the family members, his wife Amy and three children,
Asa W. (15), Wilbur (13) and daughter Bertha (8) laying down in the car to
avoid stray bullets as they drove though the combat. At one point, my
Grandfather encountered a Greek soldier and Turkish soldier engaged in
hand-to-hand combat in the street. The streets of Smyrna were narrow and the
car could not possibly pass around these two soldiers. So my Grandfather
leaned on the horn. The two soldiers separated, and my Grandfather passed
through. The two soldiers then continued their efforts to kill each other.
My Grandfather Asa K. Jennings spoke to a friend of that tragic day, and
the friend recorded the comments in “The Great Rescue.” The friend was
R.W. Abernethy who published these remarks as part of a larger article in a
book The Spirit of the Game. Basil Mathews, The Spirit of the Game, (New
York: George H. Doran Company, 1926)
On the ninth of September the vanguard of the Turkish army appeared, their
advance being delayed somewhat by the desultory resistance of the last
remnant of the Greek forces. Just outside Smyrna, on the heights that are
known as Paradise, occurred the last engagement between the two armies.
Now our home was on those slopes, and though I was in the city at the time
my family witnessed the whole affair. When I got home that night my two
boys rushed up to me shouting, ‘Gee, Dad, you ought to have been here.
You could see them shooting and falling everywhere!’ They had, you see,
the typical enthusiasm of youth for war and its glamour. About 10,000
Greeks were captured in this affair before the army gave way and made for
the ships.
On the heels of the fleeing Greeks came the victorious Turks – and they
were indeed a victorious army. Olive branches were seen on every hand,
the saddles of the horses and donkeys were gaily decorated, and the joy of
the Turks of Smyrna knew no bounds at seeing their deliverers at last.
It must be set down to their credit that despite the fact that they were
inflamed with rage at the devastation in the wake of the retreating Greek
army, at the ravaging and pillaging that are the concomitants of war, and
especially war here in the Near East where it is practiced not altogether in
accordance with the Marquis of Queensberry rules, despite this special
and intense hatred for the Greeks, the Turkish army entered the city in a
very orderly fashion. Coincident with their entrance, handbills were
circulated proclaiming that Kemal had given orders that no Christians
were to be molested....These (handbills) were dated from Paris.
But all the official orders in the world could not have staved off friction
between the Turkish soldiers and the Greeks and Armenians of Smyrna.
After what these soldiers had witnessed of Greek depredations upon
Turkish cities and Turkish subjects, anything Greek was like a red rag to a
bull. As you know what the centuries-old attitude of the Turk towards the
Armenian has been. As a consequence, it wasn’t long before skirmishes
broke out, and during these it was rather risky to be on the streets.
I remember the exciting time I had on the morning of September 13th when
I was on my way to the office. I was coming through the Armenian quarter,
and as ill luck would have it, fell in with a mob. There was firing on both
sides, for of course Turkish soldiers were everywhere. I had long since
taken the precautionary measure of arming myself with an American flag,
for that little bit of bunting was of more potential defense than any Colt
automatic. Finding myself in this pleasant little party, I pulled out my flag,
pinned it on, and made for the nearest wall. I finally reached it and then
walked sideways for quite a distance, for I had always been told that if
you must be shot by all means avoid being shot in the back
Lots of those people didn’t know an American flag from a towel. I had not
been in the Near East long, but I had been there long enough to know that
that part of the world does not consider a towel indispensable. Next to the
Golden Rule it is the most neglected attribute of civilization.
I finally got down to the office and hadn’t been there long before one of
our Armenian secretaries came to me in a paroxysm of terror. He had
known for days what fate probably awaited all Armenians in the city if the
Turks ever got control. He had been terribly upset mentally, debating
whether to remain at his post and care for his compatriots as best he could,
or try to escape before the Turks entered.
“The Turks are here, Mr. Jennings; right here in the city, and you know
what may happen any moment. I have been told to pray about it. What shall
I do? Shall I stay on here, or try to get away while there may yet be a
chance?”
I looked at the young fellow and felt a tug at my heart for he was a fine lad
and I had grown to like him. I stood up, put my hands on his shoulders, and
said, ‘My boy, I’d pray about it; yes, I’d pray – but I’d do more than that.
I’d use my legs’
His face lit up in a benediction of hope and relief as he thanked me and
sped off. Fortunately, by the use of both agencies, prayer and his legs, he
got away safely!
Later that morning we were notified that the navy had issued orders that all
Americans were to leave. But one hour was given in which to make the
necessary preparations. I immediately went back home, told my wife and
boys of the order, and hastily gathering together a few necessities we made
for the quay. I can still see that dinner sitting on the stove. There came
times the next few days when I was so famished that, like Esau, I would
have sold my birthright for that ‘mess of pottage’ we abandoned that
morning.
Leaving my family with the other Americans temporarily housed in the
theater, I returned to the office only to find Garhadian, our Armenian Boys’
Secretary, in an agony of fear and dread. He knew well enough what
awaited the Armenian population of Smyrna if the Turkish soldiers got out
of control of their officers. Garhadian rushed up to me, begging me to find
some way of saving him. Now in the orders to the Americans it had been
stated that one personal servant would be allowed to accompany each
family. The Jennings family did not possess the luxury of a domestic, so my
mind was quickly made up. I told him of the order, ending up by saying,
‘You are to be my servant for today.’
With my family safely away, I turned to help care for the thousands of
refugees who had come into the city. Perhaps we might have found some
way of handling them if the fire had not come, I don’t know. There is not
much use dwelling on that, for the fire did come, how, no one seems to
have any clear knowledge. It is known, though, that a group of Armenians
had formed a club whose purpose was to bomb some of the principal
Turkish buildings then housing officers. In some way these young
conspirators were apprehended, and the discovery of the plot naturally
infuriated the Turks, who determined upon revenge. The fire began in the
Armenian quarter. Of that there can be little doubt. Almost simultaneously
it broke out in other sections, until within a short time the whole quarter
was a mass of flames. The people had no place to go save to the quay, and
there they flocked by the thousands, with the fire behind them and water in
front of them, through neither of which they could pass.
It was then that the situation became more than desperate.
As spoken by Asa K. Jennings
In the rush to leave Turkey, Asa W. Jennings (15) chose to take a hand
written Koran that he had purchased in the market. The author has that Koran
now which is an extraordinary document of painstaking dedication and
artistic work. Asa W. accompanied his Mother Amy, brother Wilbur and
sister Bertha to Greece. The family went on to Geneva and then to the U.S.,
except once the family was safely in Piraeus, Asa W., age only 15, returned
to Smyrna, and the risk of being killed at any minute, to help his weak and ill
Father. The two had a great bond and love for each other.
Sarah Jacob’s husband Jake wrote a report on September 18, 1922, to the
International Y, excerpts from which are quoted below:
Sept. 3 Rumors of lost position by Greeks. Greeks outside of Philadelphia
(Alashehir).
Sept. 4 Greeks rout confirmed but sounds so exaggerated that it is hard to
believe; however return from Phocia.” Phocia is Foca, Turkey, today
located in the Izmir Province about 43 miles (69 km) north from Izmir’s
city center.
Sept. 5 Situation terribly confused. Greeks of wealth flee leaving poor and
leaderless behind. American relief committee formed.
Sept. 6 No news. Refugees pouring in 30,000 daily, relief began in
churches and court yards.
Sept. 7 Orphanages turned over to relief. Greek authorities take pitiable
view of situation and of their responsibility; informed that authorities will
retire on Friday.
Sept. 8 Greek officials and ships leave at 6:30 p.m. Smyrna without a
government. Cavalry coming through Paradise.” Paradise is southeast of
the center of Smyrna (Izmir). It is 3.5 miles (5.6 km) from Izmir to
Paradise (Sirinyer, Turkey today)
Sept. 9 Greek troops in great masses pass thru Paradise en route for
Tschesme (Cesme). 11 a.m. Turkish cavalry enters Smyrna and by splendid
conduct calms people. Good order till afternoon. Then looting and killing
in St. Georges Church. Rumors of trouble all along coast. Twenty dead
along Paradise road by night. All American institutions full of refugees.
Sept. 10 Sniping and looting all day, especially in St. Constanten and St.
Vauclo quarter. French began to evacuate their people. Thousands of
refugees on lighter. Turks high low, take very arrogant attitude.
Sept. 11 Armenian quarter most severely treated. Relief administered in
numerous Greek churches housing 20,000 or more refugees. President of
International College and chief petty officer attached narrowly escaped
being killed. All Americans moved to college ground with 1000 refugees.
Great anxiety with irregulars arrival.
Sept. 12 Armenian quarter 4/5 looted, with dead on streets and in houses.
Sept. 13 American consulate and naval commander orders American
women to embark for Piraeus (Greece) with American Consul General
Horton. 1 p.m. Fire started in Armenian section with strong wind blowing
toward Christian section. At American Collegiate Institution Firefighters
threatened with shooting by Turkish guards put there for protection.
Reliable American saw 2 soldiers putting kerosene on streets. Most fires
start from rear or inside the buildings.
Sept 14 Fire continued, YMCA destroyed with Armenian, Greek and
European sections, business retail wholesale sections burned up.
Robberies and murders on quay in front of all allied ships. Sending out
refugees as best we can. 700 on destroyer, 1800 on cargo boat, some
French, Italian and British ships take on other, in all about 20,000 have
escaped thus far.
Sept 15 Turkish control tightens along quay...Refugees are being
exiled...All ships available for refugees have left harbor, no others seem to
be coming.
Sincerely,
(signed) E. O. Jacob
Excerpts from “My Smyrna Disaster Diary – Part Two” by E.O. Jacob
Sept. 16 The American navy again takes a hand in the refugee situation by
taking on the Armenian boys’ orphanage, the cooperation of the Turkish
guards being obtained by periodical palm-greasing and by a generous
display of American blue jackets.
Sept. 17 A light in the darkness of heartlessness; the Aydin Brewery! I
found today that they have taken in a Greek orphanage of 85 boys who they
are feeding and housing. They also have between five and ten thousand
refugees in their beer garden. They are using up their own slender supply
of food in a soup-kitchen for the poor. The whole staff has become a
refugee organization. But they want bread, and we have not been able to
get any bakeries started since the fire.
Sept. 18 This morning we found the whole military government changed
without notice. Governor, staff, liaison officers, guards, all had vanished.
The new crowd has never heard of us so we had to start all over again
cultivating relations with the authorities. The Americans have again taken
the bull by the horns!
From the military bakeries comes direct and detailed testimony of what
has been reported from many other places...the Turkish guards took five
girls from among the refugees, stripped them, made them dance, violated
and then killed them.
Sept 19 The worst sight I have seen thus far are the 8250 old men, women
and children in the military barracks at Baldjova; there is almost no water,
and they have had no food for five days. We gave them over thirty sacks of
flour, promised bread for tomorrow, and arranged to repair the pumps. It
seems almost impossible to estimate how many refugees there are. At least
150,000 must have come from the interior, 200,000 more is the minimum
for Smyrna itself. Certainly not more than 50,000 left before the fire.
16,000 have gone since. 80,000 are in sight in camps, streets and houses.
Men from 18 to 45 years of age are being seized and deported into the
interior, estimates varying from 40,000 to 125,000. But where are the rest?
Sept 20 The seizing of all men of military age, and on both sides of the age
line, is being energetically pushed. The process completed in a given
camp, though women and children are thrust out into the streets, the prey of
both soldiers and civilian Turkish rabble.
Two British boats took off 7000 refugees today to Mitylene. But as a
whole the evacuation situation is desperate. In ten more days Turkish
permission (to remove people from Smyrna) expires.
The American navy again goes into the orphanage business...
Jennings charters space on the Italian S/S “Constantinople” and we take
off 1500 refugees, many of whom pay their passage. Jennings proceeds
with them to Mitylene.
The Armenians and Greeks who left Turkey in 1922 and 1923 as refugees
were angry at the Turks, and that anger has been passed down to subsequent
generations of people most of whom have never visited Turkey or have any
first hand knowledge of what occurred or the reasons therefore. The Turks
who suffered much greater losses did not bequeath this passion of hate to
their offspring, and more regard that period as just one more like the wars
with Russia. The Jews left Turkey to escape the violence rather than due to
issues of loyalty. The Jews were victims of violence and did not cause the
violence. The emigration from Smyrna, and subsequently from all other ports
of Turkey, 1,250,000 people in all, was exceeded only by the Holocaust as
the greatest emigration for Jews in the 20th Century, or any group of people,
to escape violence. The Jews scattered around the world, and their story has
been largely lost to history. There was death and substantial suffering en
route to the final destinations of all these peoples, but the option of staying in
Turkey would have been worse. Moving to countries at peace saved lives
and provided opportunities for better lives for these people and their unborn
children.
Captain A. J. Hepburn, U.S. Navy, Senior American Naval Officer
Present, wrote a report to the Secretary of the Navy that was forwarded by
RADM Mark L. Bristol from the flagship U.S.S. Scorpion of the U.S. Naval
Detachment, Eastern Mediterranean located in Istanbul. Quoting in part:
In July, 1922, after transferring certain forces from Anatolia to Thrace the
Greek army marched against Constantinople stopping only at the Chatildja
lines where it was opposed by the Allied forces of Occupation under
General Harrington. Shortly after this in the first part of August, 1922, I
began to get rumors of a Turkish attack upon the Greeks in Anatolia. As
time went on those reports became more substantial, so that, when the
attack came on 20 of August, I was not surprised. I felt that there was a
strong probability that this attack would be successful and the Greek army
would at least have to fall back to its original lines around Smyrna. I knew
that any successes by the Turks would be followed by a general revulsion
of feeling amongst all the Turks against Christian races. I felt certain that
the Greeks, if they had to fall back, would commit all kinds of outrages and
excesses and undoubtedly devastate the country as they retreated.
Though I did not feel that Americans would be directly attacked I knew
that the disorder would be such that I would have to provide for their
safety. At this time the U.S. Naval Detachment was still assisting the
American Relief Administration in South Russia and making regular visits
to the ports of Odessa, Theodosia and Hovorossisk, and occasional visits
to other Russian ports in the Black Sea. In addition it was necessary to
maintain a destroyer continuously at Samson and to make frequent visits to
other ports in Turkey and the Levant.
The mission of the destroyers was to cover all places where American
interests and American citizens were located, but at that time with the
seven destroyers at my disposal I was not able fully to carry out this work.
I desire to state right at once that if it had not been for the very efficient
way in which the officers and men of the Detachment carried out their
duties and, especially, kept their boats ready for all calls at all times, the
work of the Detachment would have been still more crippled...However, I
felt compelled to ask for extra destroyers to protect American lives and
interests. Twelve destroyers arrived to reinforce the Turkish Detachment
on October 22, 1922, followed by the U.S.S. BRIDGE and other ships.
The lack of an organized effort by the Turkish civilians and troops in
Smyrna to take reprisals upon the refugees there indicates conclusively that
the Turks were not especially desirous of taking reprisals. The people
killed in Smyrna were killed as a result of robberies, individual feuds and
the usual brutal attitude of Moslems towards Christians under such unusual
conditions. The evidence is conclusive that they were not killed by
organized military or civil forces. I would most emphatically report, all
reports to the contrary notwithstanding, that there was no massacre in
Smyrna at this time, and the people killed were victims of mob violence
due to a lack of control of the situation by responsible Turkish officials.
The only evidence of real reprisals was the particular enmity shown
towards the Armenians, and this enmity is accounted for by the operations
of Armenian bands against the Moslems in the Smyrna area during the
Greek occupation. These facts explain what occurred in Smyrna, but the
Turkish officials can never excuse themselves or relieve themselves of the
responsibility for not having taken the necessary steps to patrol the city,
maintain order, and thus secure the safety of lives and property.
As previously stated, the robbing, looting and disturbances began in
Smyrna before the Turks occupied the city. Also people were killed and
small fires were started. The occupation of Smyrna by the Turkish troops
had a quieting effect, as did also the proclamations issued by Turkish
authorities. The lack of patrols and organized effort to preserve peace was
a natural encouragement to the disorderly element to resume all kinds of
outrages with increased efforts. Under such encouragement Turkish
officers and men joined the civilians in looting, robbing and killing. Fires
were started and no effort was made to stop them or to prevent the
spreading of them. The unusual direction of the wind and the strength of it
spread the fire to the Christian and foreign districts and made it
impossible, after the fire got started, to get it under control with the fire
fighting appliances available, even if these had been seriously utilized. If
the usual wind, ‘inbat’, which usually blows from a westerly direction had
prevailed the fires would have burned themselves out with very little
damage. There is nothing to indicate that the Turks could have foreseen this
unusual direction and strength of the wind. Therefore, the accusation that
the burning of Smyrna was a deliberate act of the Turks to destroy the
Christians and foreign quarter is hard to believe. That the Turks did start
fires in the Christian quarter is decidedly believable. That the Christians
should have set fire to their own houses before evacuating them is highly
probable, especially in view of the fact that, when they evacuated the
interior, they set fire to their own villages before they left them, and
further, to the fact that Greek officers had openly stated before the
evacuation of Smyrna that, if they had to evacuate, they would burn the
city. There is no evidence that the Greek army carried out his threat or that
there was any organization on the part of the Christians to burn their own
part of the city before evacuating.
The evidence in this report of the attitude of the Turkish officials the day
after the fire and before they could have known of any accusation against
them seems to indicate very clearly that they had not ordered or
sympathized with the burning of Smyrna. It would be natural to believe that
the Turks would not want to destroy an important city like Smyrna, which
they had just captured and considered a most valuable prize of war.
However, legally and technically, because the Turkish officials in
command did not take the necessary precaution to utilize patrols and
guards to preserve order and prevent disturbances in the city of Smyrna,
these officials, and therefore the Turkish Government, are responsible for
the burning of Smyrna.
Previously the comment was made that huge dividends were paid by the
U.S. not joining with its Allies to occupy any part of Turkey or to take any
negative action towards Turkey. In fact, during World War One when the U.S.
and Turkey were technically at war the U.S. missionaries and others were
welcome in Turkey for their positive performance on behalf of the Turks.
Then Captain Hepburn wrote:
There is to be noted in this report the cordial relations which greatly
assisted our relief work that continually existed between the Turkish
authorities and the American officials in Smyrna, as well as with the
American civil population in Smyrna. This I attribute not only to the tactful
conduct of American officials at the time in Smyrna, but especially to the
conduct of the American naval officials throughout the time that the United
States Naval Detachment had been in Turkish waters. Our naval vessels
have been received in all ports of Turkey at all times very cordially and
even at times when the naval vessels of other nations were not allowed to
enter the ports; or even, as an example, when in Samson the boat from a
British destroyer that attempted to land was warned off the dock by an
armed guard. The American destroyers had established a reputation of
having no political designs and of being in the ports simply on peaceful
errands. This meant that these destroyers could lend a preparedness of
influence for the protection of Christians in all the ports visited by these
destroyers.
Mrs. Amy W. Jennings, wife of Asa K. Jennings, was quoted on October
26, 1922, in the Watertown (New York) Daily Times:
Mrs. Jennings pays a high tribute to the work of the American sailors ‘most
of them boys of barely 20,’ as she describes them, and of the ‘staggering,
starved army of Greeks, who had fought nine months on no pay and no
food, save bread and olives.’
Her last night in Smyrna was one of untold horror. Her statement that it
was ‘the blackest page in modern history’ is born out by the meager details
she reveals, though obviously she is trying to forget the awful experience
through which she was forced to go.
We arrived in Smyrna, August 16, after having been in Europe for two
years, says Mrs. Jennings. In order that the children might go to school we
lived at the International College in Paradise, a small place about four
miles from the city proper. Mr. Jennings went back and forth to his work in
the city in an automobile, always coming home early enough in the evening
so there was still light enough to see the American flag on the car.
When the evacuation commenced, for nine days refugees poured into the
city, about 30,000 of them arrived daily. Our college, which covered 2
acres, formed a haven for hundreds of people who were allowed to sleep
in the chapel and gymnasium, while the campus was filled with horses,
cows, donkeys and household goods.
Including students and American families, there were more than 1,500 of
us in the place, and for protection we had 18 American sailors. No one of
us was permitted to even cross the school grounds without a sailor guard.
They were just youngsters, most of them around 20 years, but they did the
work of veterans. One of them, who had been in the World War, said he
had never been under such a strain before, because of thinking of many
lives depended on a single man.
Mrs. Jennings told of the experience of Dr. MacLachlan, president of the
college, who set out with a handful of sailors one day to endeavor to
prevent the Turks from looting a settlement house outside the gates.
We couldn’t see them, for we were inside the walls, but we heard what
was going on, Mrs. Jennings explained. The Turks fired at the sailors at
close range and their chief called to them, ‘Run for your lives, boys, but
for God’s sake, don’t fire.’ They escaped by racing zig-zag behind a stone
wall.
The Turks stopped Dr. MacLachlan and clubbed him until he was bleeding.
Certainly a pleasant way of showing gratitude to the white-haired man who
had worked among them for 30 years. Then the Americans were ordered to
undress and give up their money. A revolver was even taken from the
officer in charge of the sailors. A Turk went to stab Dr. MacLachlan with a
bayonet, but he grabbed it and wrenched it from its holder. The blade cut
his hands.
Finally a Turkish officer came along and interfered and ordered offenders
to give back the clothing. When Dr. McLaughlin finally got away, he had to
be carried in.
That last night, continues Mrs. Jennings, when ten of us American women
at the college were taken into Smyrna to go aboard the destroyer Simpson,
which escorted us to Athens, we drove through streets abandoned, save for
heaps of dead bodies, wrecked cars and groups of dreadful looking
Turkish soldiers.
Most of the bodies were horribly mutilated, arms chopped off, women’s
breasts carved away and throats slashed. When a Turk can use a knife, he
never uses a gun.
Maybe this is why the Turks today do not know the history of Smyrna.
However, if both Greeks and Turks, today, acknowledge the conduct of their
ancestors, the air can be cleared and a new relationship created based on
mutual respect.
MAN’S INHUMANITY TO MAN
O
h, Lord, why do men commit such acts against each other? What do we not
understand? How do we prevent this destruction of the human race?
The Ottoman Turks were a militaristic society that was organized to
conquer and control. To control, they treated people in harsh ways that bread
contempt that has sublimated into the Greek DNA (designation of genetic
inheritance). By the standards of today, there is no relieving the Ottoman
Turks of their responsibility. As Christians, all we can do is remember the
words of Jesus Christ. “Father, forgive them; for they know not what they
do.” Luke 23:34. That is our obligation as Christians.
The Greeks were finally free of the Ottoman Turks by 1830. That could
have been the end of the suffering. The Greeks needed a common focus. The
Megali Idea was a huge mistake by the politicians. For the first 90 so years
Greece expanded its territory, and one can argue that was good. However,
the entry into World War One when it was clear that the Allies would win the
War so that Greece could share in the spoils of war was a dishonorable
objective. Such a purpose was contrary to the message of Christianity. The
Church failed the Greek people.
Landing Greek troops at Smyrna in 1919 was an invasion. If the Turks had
landed their troops on Greek soil, the Greek people would have considered
that an invasion. The Golden Rule tells us that Greece should have never
landed troops in Smyrna. The problems in Greece today can be traced back
to that fateful decision.
The Greek people, or any people, do not want war. They are led to war by
misguided fools for their own reasons and ego. A democracy is a pluralistic
form of government designed to prevent monopolistic decisions that lead to
aggression. Greece did not have those controls in place. The Greek
politicians argued and disagreed to such an extent that Greece could not
govern itself. For that reason, the Allies, led by Russia required that a
monarch be appointed. That was not pluralistic. The politicians lied as
politicians do about why the Greek people should send their sons to war. For
a democracy to function, the public must be educated and informed. That is
the major challenge.
The Ottoman Turks were allies of the losers in World War One. The
Ottoman Turkish empire was a shell of its former greatness. They were
known as the “sick man of Europe.” The Turks willingly gave up their
territories like Syria, Iraq and more. They did not surrender their identity.
The occupation of Turkish soil by the Italians, French, British and Greeks
was a lawless act. This was a challenge to the sovereignty of the Turkish
people. The Turks were poor, uneducated and unorganized, but they had a
national identity. The Turks had a man who was arguably the greatest leader
of a government ever. He ignited that national identity, formed an army, and
despite being the weaker force in each battle, defeated his opponents. The
Turkish people followed him with enthusiasm. His word was law, but not out
of fear. The Turkish people loved and respected him and his judgment on
their behalf. He did not fail them or violate that trust they placed in him.
Today it would be accurate to say he is semi-deified by Turkish people. He
was and is considered a leader, the “father of the Turks,” rather than a
politician.
The Turks were defending their sovereignty, their independence. That is
not an aggressive act, but rather a defensive act. No parent wants their
children going to war, but when defense of the nation is as stake, war is
authorized. So war is authorized to defend a country, but not to attack another
country.
In all wars both sides in the war do terrible things to the other side. That is
going to happen and cannot be completely prevented. Organized and
disciplined military forces can be controlled. The Greek army and Turkish
army were not well controlled, and unspeakable violence occurred. Violence
feeds more violence. Those who have never served in the military during
wartime have no concept of the mentality when it is kill or be killed. The
concept cannot even be explained satisfactorily to those who have never
served.
A major reason for the violence was the absence of civil authority in
Turkey before the Greek army landed in 1919. There was a high incidence of
violence in all forms. A lot of the violence became identified with ethnic
background. However, that violence was personal rather than organized by
government.
There was a substantial Jewish population in Turkey. They were not
contentious with other ethnic groups. In all the letters, diaries, reports and
other records of the violence between 1919 and 1922 there was never that I
have seen anyone mentioned as being Jewish. The Jews backed away from
violence and respected authority. That is the law of the U.S. today. If
someone offends or attacks another person, that person only has the right to
defend them self. They do not have the right to attack. That tradition of public
behavior did not exist in Turkey for many people. Obviously, such should be
taught and instilled in society as a belief of all people.
The Armenian culture bred a hatred of Turks rather than an understanding
of why violence would hurt the Armenian people more than help them. The
Armenians were a minority in a militaristic society. Confronting the
authorities and Turkish people was poor judgment by the Armenians, and
they paid a heavy price. The Armenian people would have been better
served conducting themselves like the Jews did. Being a minority is like
being a tourist in another country. As a tourist we should respect the laws and
customs of that country. We should walk away from a fight and not pick a
fight.
Now we understand why this tragedy occurred. How then is ethnic
violence prevented in a society that does not have the institutions to prevent
violence?
In Turkey, Asa K. Jennings arranged in 1922 to move the minorities out of
Turkey to Greece where they would be safe from violence. Years later India
divided its country into India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
The mistake George H. Bush made was believing in the Pollyanna idea
that Sunni and Shia Muslims could get along with each other and get along
with Kurds who the Arabs had been trying to extinguish in a genocide. The
Sunni and Shia have not agreed on succession within their faith since the
death of their prophet Mohammed. Mohammed died in 632 A.D. and the
Sunni and Shia have been fighting ever since. Tolerance is not a requirement
of Islam, but became a prescription of Christianity with the New Testament.
George H. Bush was not going to be able to settle that dispute. To think he
would shows he lacked critical understanding of this important area of the
world. His inexperience cost the U.S. dearly in blood and treasure. Iraq
should have been divided into three sovereign states and the people moved
like the people of India according to religion.
The problems in Turkey and India were solved with competent leadership,
the kind of leadership Greece and Iraq have never had. When the state fails,
people suffer.
The Greek people in 1922 were very fortunate despite their politicians.
There was a heart of a lion in one man. The self-serving politicians had the
population of Greece divided between Royalists and supporters of Venizelos
which led to a coup days after the rescue started of nearly 20% of the Greek
population. Even in this most critical time for the Greek people, the
politicians could not put their disputes aside and come together for the good
of their nation. The politicians of Greece would have stood by idly while
1,250,000 people expired in Turkey, except for the initiative of one man who
found support from Gazi Mustafa Kemal and Captain Theofanides.
The minorities in Turkey had to be saved by someone whose moral
compass pointed true, a person committed to others rather than self, a person
who the Ecumenical Patriarch said was blessed by the right hand of God in
Christianity.
Who is this man, and where does a person like this come from?
THE AMERICAN RELIEF COMMITTEE
T
he American community in Smyrna was small, and all the Americans knew
each other. Asa K. Jennings had been a community organizer in places like
Czechoslovakia and Upstate New York as minister and employee of the
YMCA.
When the crisis started in August 1922 Asa formed the American Relief
Committee. The members were all Americans. They included the President
of the International College, employees of the American tobacco and oil
companies and other business interests, and employees of the YMCA and
YWCA. Each person was empowered with a title and assignment. Someone
was appointed to meet and work with local government officials. Another
person was assigned to get ships to remove refugees from the danger.
Locating food and fuel to bake bread was a major priority.
The task ahead of them was to feed, protect, and ultimately evacuate to
safety 25,000 Jews, 25,000 Armenians and 300,000 Greeks. If the American
Relief Committee failed, these people would die at the hands of the Turks.
The Turkish plan was to march these people to the interior of Turkey and
their deaths. These numbers were provided by U.S. Consul General George
Horton, and confirmed by the Greeks themselves who survived this
Holocaust.
The Chairman was Caleb W. Lawrence. He wrote to Mr. Van Bommel:
I have been going over again, in memory, the events of the past month and I
have now to write you regarding your colleagues Mr. E. O. Jacob and Mr.
A.K. Jennings.
When the first Committee was formed Mr. E.O. Jacob was absent at
Phocia, and therefore Mr. Jennings was given an important appointment as
head of the General Relief Department. With his well known fearlessness
and energy he drove his Chevrolet through all parts of the city, locating
refugees and collecting them in camps. He obtained possession of a house,
#490 Quai, which he immediately filled with women and children. He was
soon obliged to provide for maternity cases and therefore he set apart one
room for a maternity ward. Several confinements were cared for in this
ward. #490 filled up until there were some 500 people in it. Mr. Jennings
then got possession of other houses into which he thrust defenseless girls,
children and women. He cared for those helpless people, often missing his
meals and frequently getting only one meal a day.
D.A. Davis, Senior Secretary for Europe of the International Committee of
Young Men’s Christian Associations of North America, wrote on February
19, 1923, to C.V. Hibbard of the YMCA in New York City:
Last Thursday I spent a very full day in Athens with A.K. Jennings.
Together we called upon the Minister of Public Welfare, who has charge
of all the refugees in Greece; the Minister of War, the Chief of the
Revolutionary Committee, who is practically the dictator of Greece today;
and the Minister of Foreign Affairs. In addition to this we met the official
Turkish delegate on the commission to take charge of the exchange of the
prisoners and took him to the Palace where the commission was meeting
and introduced him. It is an interesting fact that the Turkish delegate whose
absence delayed the work of the commission for nearly a week, afterward
arrived in the American battleship at the request of the YMCA.
I think that no one would contradict the statement that Jennings is the best
known and most loved American in the Near East today. I was astonished
to see the entree which he has everywhere he goes. I have been with him
now in Athens, Smyrna, and Constantinople. Everywhere he seems to be
known. Practically no request which he makes in any quarter is refused.
The story of what he has done is one of the most fascinating of any that I
have heard in connection with the war. He has been too busy to write much
about it up to the present time. He is constantly on the go. For more than a
week during the evacuation he had practically no sleep, some of his
greatest work being done as a result of his arousing governors, admirals,
and members of the cabinet from their beds between midnight and five
o’clock in the morning.
I am wondering whether there was ever a time in Greek history where a
Greek cabinet president was called out of bed at five o’clock in the
morning and succeeded in having a cabinet meeting before nine o’clock
before Jennings came along. To a most unusual extent Jennings has the
confidence of all the American organizations working in the Near East as
well as all the American consular, diplomatic, and naval authorities. When
we boarded the ‘McFarland’ the captain put Jennings in his own bed. This
is an indication of the respect I have seen paid to him everywhere.
There are two definite jobs which Jennings feels that he is still bound to
see through; and after seeing the authorities in Greece and Turkey and
being able to observe the extra-ordinary unofficial role which he is
playing, I am convinced that it would be a mistake for us to call him away
before these two tasks are really finished. These tasks are the exchange of
prisoners and the transportation of refugees. It is quite possible that before
this is done there will be mixed with it the question of the exchange of
populations between Greece and Turkey.
Jennings read me about thirty pages of a report on the evacuation which he
has written. It would still be illegible to any one else and he has promised
to put that in shape and as soon as possible to bring us up to date. It is too
much to expect, however, that he will ever give us very detailed reports of
his work; first of all because he is too busy doing things to talk about them,
and doing things that are really worth while; and, secondly, because he is
withal modest and hesitates to report things that seem to be telling about
his own accomplishments. Incidentally I might say that I saw the Greek
Patriarch Meletios present him today with the Gold Order of the
Redeemer, which decoration had already be awarded but had not
previously been presented.
Jennings has been, is and unless we force him out intends to remain till his
work here is finished as YMCA secretary. He has refused offers of any
salary he wished to name from other organizations.
From the report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine (nee Anita McCormick, daughter
of Cyrus McCormick, the inventor of the mechanical reaper. She was later
married in Richfield Springs, New York):
After the refugees had been transferred to Greece, much emergency work
was absolutely essential, and the American people responded most
generously and at once to meet this emergency.
Unfortunately, however, all our relief work at this time as well as after the
war was confined to relief among the so-called Christian nationalities.
This was true also of our work for the orphans of the Near East, forgetting
that all who suffered, Turks as well as Armenians and Greeks, were
members of the human family and suffered alike; and that the children of
Turkish birth were no more responsible for their condition and position as
helpless orphans than the orphans whom we helped.
As a result of AKJ’s work with the American Relief Committee, he was
invited to the Lausanne Conference.
It was my privilege also to be present at the first Lausanne Conference
between the Turks and the Allies; and I was requested to serve as one of
the members of the Commission to Exchange Prisoners, unofficially,
however, as only members of non-belligerent nations were eligible to
membership on this Commission.
However, the Turkish member of this Commission and the Greek member,
together with the President, who was a Swiss, asked me to serve and I did.
Admiral Bristol again put at the service of the Commission American
destroyers, thus greatly facilitating our work. All this experience brought
me in close contact with the Turkish people and with Turkish officials, and
I obtained an understanding of their point of view as well as their great
needs. I learned then the heroic struggle the Turks were honestly making, in
spite of the fact that they felt that the Christians and Christian nations were
all against them.
Naturally, this is not to be wondered at when you consider the propaganda
that as been given out in this country. But after living with the Turks and
learning their point of view, and hearing something of the other side of the
story, one learns not only to be tolerant, but he realizes if he is to be true to
himself, he must be fair and just. It was because I tried to be fair with
myself that I felt called to enlist what little influence I might have and what
service I might render for the aid of the Turkish people.
Not discounting the needs, or without lack of appreciation of assistance for
the Greeks and Armenians, I felt that we should have shared our
sympathies and our service and help with the Turks. I believe what the
Turkish nation has done since they have gained their independence has not
been duplicated at any other time in history by any other nation.
They have started out in the western way, and have taken the idea of self-
determination most seriously. The separation of church and state was a
drastic measure, but it was accomplished. Abolishing the fez, and
substituting the western headgear, is something that can only be
appreciated by those who have lived in Oriental countries.
Discarding the ancient law based on the Koran, and adopting the Swiss
Civil Code and the Italian Criminal Code, has revolutionized the system of
law in that country. As a result of this, the development of the rights of
women has been a great factor in their progress. The Koran and the state
law permitted a man to have four wives. The present law forbids a man to
have more than one.
Previously, divorce could be had at the will of the husband by simply
pronouncing his wife divorced three times in the presence of witnesses.
Now it is impossible for a man to divorce his wife without due process of
law, or without adequately providing for her support. And he cannot
divorce her without cause.
The new educational system provides for universal education, which is
compulsory. It should be said that as yet there are not sufficient teachers
nor are there adequate school buildings to provide for all of the children of
school age. But the government is making every effort possible to make
provision for this need At the preset time abandoned buildings and houses
are being used for school purposes.
There has been some criticism of Turkey as being an autocracy instead of a
republic as claimed. Those of us who live in Turkey admit, if you wish for
the sake of argument, that Turkey today is a benevolent autocracy. But it is
not the former Turkey, an imperialistic Turkey, a monarchy, a theocracy.
Turkey today is a republic in spirit. Those who know the Turkish leaders
and are familiar with the struggles and the sacrifices the people are making
know that their leaders do care for the people; and in every way possible
they are seeking to provide the people with a representative form of
government. Their purpose is to grant equal rights to all, especially this is
true as regards the women and children.
Commercially, since the withdrawal of the Greeks and the Armenians,
business has been left chiefly in the hands of the Turks. The Jews fare
better than they did with the Greeks and Armenians in the country. The few
Americans who are there, the French, the English and others continue to do
business.
What the government wishes is that their own people shall develop the
ability to administer their own affairs, commercially and economically, as
well as educationally and socially. As the result of this new life, new
social conditions evolved. Women who had been secluded are beginning
to come out. Young people are beginning to be seen together on the streets
for the first time and in public places such as parks and entertainments and
parties.
The offer of Admiral Bristol, on behalf of the U.S. Navy, to provide ships
to AKJ was critical. During the negotiations regarding the exchange of
Prisoners of War, the Turks said they would provide one Greek prisoner the
Turks held in exchange for a Turk the Greeks held. If you understand the
Turkish persona, as AKJ did, you don’t argue with a Turk. They are
intransigent. AKJ’s leadership was non-confrontational. As a social worker
most of his life, he was never in a position to dictate to anyone. So he
learned to achieve his objectives by other methods. He simply accepted the
Turkish demand without making an issue of it. However, there was a
problem. The Turks held many Greeks as prisoners, and the Greeks held very
few Turks.
The prisoners were repatriated using U.S. Navy ships in such a way that
Turkey could not keep count. AKJ just ignored the Turkish demand and
proceeded with his work in the name of humanity.
This Turkish Reformation would not have occurred without the leadership
and vision of Gazi Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, and his greatness would not have
been created without the invasion of Turkey by the Greeks. Turkey started
this transformation as a destitute nation mired in the 16th century while
Greece was a western nation with the advantages a free society brings. The
transformation of Turkey in the sixteen short years between founding of the
Turkish Republic in 1923 and Ataturk’s death in 1938 was miraculous.
Turkey in subsequent years has grown and prospered as a peaceful nation
beyond the wildest dreams of anyone. Meanwhile, Greece sinks further into
the debt that oppresses the Greek people. Worse, the Greek people do not
have any vision of how to extract themselves from a ruinous history.
AKJ, commenting on his life’s work, said his major achievement was not
his role in saving 1,250,000 people from death, or being selected by Greece
and Turkey which hated each other after a bitter war to serve to repatriate
prisoners of war and population exchange. He felt his major contribution was
his role in the transformation of Turkey from the backward, ancient society to
a modern society based on Western principles. His selfless service was
carried on by his son Asa W. Jennings.
Paramount to AKJ’s service was his believe that the Turks must not be
given anything. They must earn what they receive. The Turks were always
looking for the American hand out. AKJ refused. AKJ acted as an advisor,
not a wealthy philanthropist. He, in fact, was not wealthy, and could not draw
on the resources of the United States government. There was no foreign aid,
or should we say, gift. The Turks had to work for what they achieved, and
they became a better nation as a result. By contrast, the Greeks since their
independence have lived off the product of other countries in the form of
national debt.
Writing to Mrs. Emmons Blaine, AKJ said:
What the (Turkish) people are really trying to do along all lines is to help
themselves, and to become in the development of their country a nation to
be respected, and to attain a rightful place among the family of nations.
The work I am connected with at the present time in Turkey is an endeavor
to help the people help themselves along the lines they have so wisely
chosen and in a way that they can understand.
Our purpose in doing this is, first, to help them to build personality and
develop character.
Second, to cooperate with them in working out a method of evoking the
spirit of brotherhood, not only among people in Turkey, but between the
Turkish people and others.
And, third, a motive for service founded on the principle of love and
mutual respect. And to achieve this, we are seeking with them to train a
reliable personnel, develop their own agencies, organizations and
institutions, and work out a program acceptable to them, and which they
themselves will be responsible for creating.
We are interested in releasing human life and in the development of
character; not erecting buildings or promoting any specific form of dogma,
creed or religion.
A simple mission to save and protect lives evolved into a mission to
release human life to achieve its peaceful possibilities.
After the work of the American Relief Committee was completed, Asa
was asked by the King of Greece and the Turks to stay on for humanitarian
work. He could not do both. The Greeks were a western country with many
advantages. The Turks were destitute economically and socially. He chose
the Turks as being more in need. In the report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine he
said:
After the work in Turkey which was of a general nature, we took up
specifically the demonstration of a concrete plan of cooperation and
service in Smyrna, in order to help them to realize some of the new
humanitarian and social aspirations of the people, under the new
republican form of government; and at the same time to develop a definite
program which would not only help the people who came in direct contact
with our efforts, but help to promote a better understanding between the
people of Turkey and America.
That man with the heart where the lion sleeps shows its character in many
ways.
I have for many years been connected with the national organization of the
YMCA. That institution has two branches in Constantinople. These
organizations are considered by the Turks as foreign institutions, and the
very word ‘Christian’ has an entirely opposite meaning in the minds of the
Turkish people; a word with which they associate the Crusades and the
intrigues of representatives of Christianity rather than with the
consciousness of the American people; to whom the word ‘Christian’
means a way of life, rather than a creed, dogma or political conception.
The YMCA is doing splendid work in Constantinople, but Constantinople
is a cosmopolitan city. Smyrna is a Turkish city. Asia Minor also, outside
of Constantinople, is entirely Turkish today. The slogan of ‘Turkey for the
Turks’ is as significant in the minds of the Turks as ‘America for the
Americans’. They insist upon developing their own institutions, and do not
propose to have foreign institutions imposed upon them.
A “Community Welfare Council” was created with Aziz Bey, who was
formerly governor of Gallipoli, Magnasia and Smyrna, and eight other
representative Turkish leaders in official, educational and business
circles, making nine Turks in all, and three Americans, the president of the
American college for Boys in Smyrna, the director of the Gary Tobacco
Company, and myself.
This done, we worked out a program of activities under three heads; social
work, publications and practical education courses, and physical
education. The social work, for example, included the establishment of a
baby home staffed by Turks. Sewing societies provided the clothes for the
babies. The shoemakers’ union contributed shoes for the babies. The first
children’s clinic was established with a Turkish nurse and doctor. This
was the first child welfare program in Turkey, and a model for others to
follow. Then there was the day nursery so mothers could work and leave
their small children, unprotected children, at a safe location. The tobacco
and fruit packing industries gave employment to thousands of women, but
there was no nursery. The women and their employers supported the
nursery.
Among publications received from America in our search for help, was a
collection of twelve letters published by the Department of Health of the
City of Chicago. These letters have been translated into Turkish, and are
being sent each month to mothers for a period of twelve months. They seek
to instruct the mother how to feed and care for her child during the first
year of its life.
This also proved a great service. The Minister of the Interior of Angora
wrote the director of public health in Smyrna and said that these
publications had been brought to his attention, and he wished to commend
them; and asked for their widest possible circulation throughout the
country. The entire cost of translation, publication and distribution of these
letters was paid for from American funds.
Then there was the summer camp where families with boys and girls
mixed playing games and enjoyed playing in the sea. Of course, there were
people who were suspicious of the intentions of foreigners.
This spirit has been kept alive through the explosive mixture of religion
and politics in the combination of church and state, and the lack of
opportunity for independent thinking; also the lack of a system of education
free from religious and political control.
The playgrounds provided a competitive environment for young people
who remained friends after the event regardless of who won or lost. Such
tolerance was not part of the ancient Muslim society, but was important to
changing Turkey into a peaceful nation.
An agreement was reached with the city to create an athletic field.
The entire field was graded and reduced to a level. A 400 meter cinder
running track was made, and the field was fenced. We put up a building in
which we provided four dressing rooms for opposing teams, as well as
rooms for the officials. In between these rooms for opposing teams we
provided a bathroom with twelve showers, the first and only ones of a
public nature in Smyrna.
Great interest in sports has been aroused. The administration of this field
has been placed in our hands, because they believe that we will give
everyone a fair show, and they agreed to abide by our decisions.
On the field no obscene language is permitted, and only fair play and clean
sports tolerated. This phase of work is having a far reaching influence, and
is one of the great factors today in developing a high standard of
sportsmanship. This is the best sport field in Turkey. What is being done
there is watched throughout the entire country.
This was leadership by example with the majority of the management
being Turkish. Good news spreads, and these programs were copied around
Turkey. While Gazi Mustafa Kemal Ataturk was closing mosques and
banishing mullahs, he was encouraging AKJ to open similar facilities all
over Turkey. These facilities, in the last analysis, were designed on the
Christian model of ethical behavior without ever using the word Christian.