9. The Plight of the Refugees

THE PLIGHT OF THE REFUGEES
A
fter the rescue at Smyrna had been completed, and the effort to save
hundreds of thousands of people from other ports of Turkey was well under
way, the attention of the relief workers turned to the Greeks, Armenians and
Jews spread over the various parts of Greece. The refugees were safe from
an attacking army, but at great risk of starvation and disease.
Embarking Refugees from Mitylene
Photos of Tent City and People Walking Over Hill
Asa W. Jennings Facing Camera Taking Refugees to Salonika, Greece
Rev. Jennings Still in Greece
By the Chateauguay Record. The following article was recently printed in
the Paris edition of the New York Herald, and was written from an interview
given by A.K. Jennings at Constantinople.
Scourges Sweep Scutary Refugees Living In Stables – Ottoman Greeks
Die by Hundreds in Filth and Squalor as Babies Are Born.
Constantinople – While the dead are being carried out, children are being
brought into the world whose mothers pray that the young lives will be taken
before their offspring have time to die from starvation in filthy stables at
Scutari, where 10,000 Ottoman Greeks are living in the most abject
wretchedness that has been seen in the Near East.
Three thousand of the 10,000 refugees who were brought recently from
Trebizond, on the Black Sea, are living in two stables, through the leaky
roofs of which the rain pours, making mud of the dirt floors. Two hundred
and ninety-seven persons in those two stables have died from smallpox and
typhus during the past seven days lying wrapped in blankets or rugs for a day
or even longer before their neighbors realize that they have passed away –
and all the time the living cook their meager meals over open fires at the side
of the corpses.
Such is the condition of the refugee camp at Scutari, so infinitely bad that
the British High Commissioner sent a member of his staff to investigate,
while the Near East Relief is rushing food and medical supplies. The
condition of these refugees is a menace to the health of Constantinople.
It is certain that hundreds of these refugees are doomed to die in the near
future despite all that can now be done to save them.
A.K. Jennings, who did much for the refugees in Smyrna at the time of the
fire last September, visited the camp and was appalled at the conditions of
life and the suffering. When he returned here from a full day spent on
investigation, he said:
People who were a few weeks ago prosperous peasants in Anatolia are
now living in conditions of filth and disease which would kill the most
hardy animals. Those fortunate enough to have saved something in the
flight from their homes spread a rug to sit upon. Ninety percent are old
men, women and children, and have only the clothes they are wearing.
Here with stray copper cooking utensils, the mother cooks a scanty meal
beside her children who search their bodies for vermin. The most
elementary principles of sanitation and privacy are lacking, the stench is
overwhelming. People wrapped in bundles of rags are dead for days
before those living beside them know it. Above the noisy rabble arises the
voice of the village priest praying over the dead. In parts of stables
children are being brought into the world while their mothers are crying to
God to take them.
The date of this interview was last December. Have just found the
translation so am sending it on A.K.J.
Then, there was another newspaper account that describes the horror faced
by the refugees.
Extract from the daily paper, ‘Amalphela of Smyrna,’ now published in
Athens. Oldest daily newspaper in Greece.
During the past few days there has been in Athens the American
philanthropist, Asa K. Jennings, who supervised the evacuation of
Smyrna, and succeeded through his personal intervention in persuading
the Turks (that is, he went personally to Mustafa Kemal) to permit Greek
ships to proceed into Kemalist waters and transport thousands of exiles
who were massed on the seashore, to safety in Greece. Subsequently he
helped in the rescue of 67,000 refugees from the Pontus, who were
scattered all along the shores of the Black Sea. He also saved thousands of
orphans from Ordou, and with American steamers transferred them to
Greece.
Mr. Jennings received our representative and consented to speak to our
readers of his great philanthropic work. We met Mr. Jennings in his
drawing room, which he uses also as his office, in the hotel Grande
Gretagne. We found him studying a series of maps of Greece, the Pontus
and Asia Minor. With red ink, he was marking the different places where,
in deplorable condition, the refugees are now collected. He was deep in
arrangements and plans for the future care of the present refugees and for
those who are on the way from the Black Sea coast. He was studying the
routes by which thousands of destitute refugees are trying to escape.
“How many thousands of refugees are still waiting along the shores of the
Pontus,” we asked Mr. Jennings.
He replied: On the coast there are at present about twenty thousand of
which 3,000 are at Samsoun, 5,000 in Kerasoun, 2,000 in Ordou, 2,000 in
Trebizond, and the remainder 8,000, at various other points of the coast, in an
awful condition, destitutes and nearly naked. In the interior of Asia Minor
there are still to be found about 150,000 refugees, who are mostly on the
march to the coast. I am now working for the transport of these unfortunates,
as well as for many orphans who are now mingled with the refugees on the
march. The number of these orphans is still unknown, but is very large. The
Greek Government, however, has decided not to receive for the present any
more refugees, as there is no immediate prospect of housing them or feeding
then. The whole situation is very difficult. This decision cannot stand long
for these refugees are running the risk of being sent back to the interior of
Asia Minor if ships are not ready to take them away when they reach the
coast. They are certain to die through exposure, cold and privations. My
reading of the situation I am sending to Mr. Doxiades, Minister of Public
Assistance, and I hope to succeed in arranging some method of bringing away
to safety these destitute and downtrodden people. As soon as the government
makes room for these people, we will undertake the transport and feeding of
all of them en route. The American Near East Relief is cooperating in this