13. Eleftherios Venizelos

Hurewitz, Diplomacy in the Near and Middle East, Volume II, (Princeton,
New Jersey: D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc,1956)
Mustafa Kemal instructed the Ottoman Turks in the Smyrna area to
withdraw to the interior rather than engage the Greek Army. His purpose was
to stretch out the supply lines of the Greeks, and to preserve his forces for a
battle later. The Greek Army became weary during its three year occupation
of Turkey, and was not properly supplied.
The Prime Minister of Greece in 1919 when the Greek army landed in
Turkey was Eleftherios Venizelos. His expertise was not in making military
decisions or based on battlefield experience, but his adversary, Mustafa
Kemal was well schooled and experienced in military matters..
King Constantine opposed the actions being taken by the Prime Minister.
The King had opposed Prime Minister Venizelos getting Greece involved
with World War One. The Prime Minister committed Greece to the Allied
side and Greek troops to battle. Some said the King’s opposition was based
on his family’s relationship to the Kaiser of Germany. That may be true, but
maybe the King recognized the folly of war. Whatever the motives, the King
was opposed. The population was split between Royalists supporting the
King and those supporting Venizelos. The Prime Minister made the decision
to land the Greek army in Turkey. King Constantine left Greece.
In 1920 Venizelos was defeated in the General Election. His opponents in
the election had promised to withdraw the troops from Turkey. After Prime
Minister Venizelos was defeated, King Constantine was recalled to govern
Greece. The expectation was he would withdraw the Greek military from
Turkey, but he did not. Many of the officers in the Greek Army in Turkey
were replaced with officers loyal to the King. The King, rather than
withdrawing from Turkey, continued on with the expansion in Turkey. The
King ignored the option of keeping Greece at peace as he had proposed in
arguments with Prime Minister Venizelos. That was one of the most fateful
decisions in Greek history. After being in the field in Turkey for three years
and as many as seven more in the Balkans many of the Greek soldiers just
wanted to return home to their families in Greece. The stage was set for a
Greek disaster.
Russia was going through the Bolshevik revolution and had lost interest
being Turkey’s adversary to the east. In 1921 the Russians and Nationalist
Government of Turkey signed the Treaty of Friendship. Turkey and Russia
dated the agreement on March 16, 1921, that fixed the border with Georgia,
Armenia and Azerbaijan. J.C. Hurewitz, Diplomacy in the Near and Middle
East, Volume II, Now Mustafa Kemal could turn his attention to the west to
force the Greek Army out of Turkey. As part of the agreement there was a
letter commitment from the Russians to provide the Turks with “more than
45,000 rifles, 300 machine guns, and nearly a hundred field guns, with
appropriate ammunition.” Andrew Mango, Ataturk: The Biography of the
Founder of Modern Turkey, (Woodstock, New York: The Overlook Press,
1999)
The invasion of Turkey by Greece in many ways helped to promote
Mustafa Kemal as the leader of the Turkish people. Most Greeks today are
not aware of this fact. If Greece had chosen the option of using their
formidable diplomatic skills, and had not put Greek soldiers on Turkish soil,
there would not have been a cause celebre. The Turkish people would not
have been rallied to an emotional cause. Greece would have enhanced its
position further, if Greece had opposed occupation of parts of Turkey by the
Italians, French and British. The Turks were uneducated and unorganized.
They lacked an industrial infrastructure. They were so weak as an
organization of people that even the Sultan was unable to impose his will on
the Turkish people. The Greeks could have created a partnership with the
Turkish people that would have led to the same practical result as raising the
Greek flag in Turkey, but without raising the flag. The Greeks could have
negotiated with the Turks to create local police departments for the good of
all to stop the violence that pervaded the country. Instead, the Greek
politicians created the greatest problem the Greek people faced from 1821 to
the present day.
The Greek politicians led with the weakness of Greece, and that was the
Greek economy and national debt. The economy supports the military. The
strength of Greece was its diplomatic skills, the one area where the Greek
politicians excelled. The Greek politicians did not consider their strength,
but instead selected a military invasion.
From the date of Greek independence until today, Greece has been plagued
by divisive politics and devoid of a leader to create an economic engine.
That engine is necessary to drive the economy of Greece to pay down the
debts and improve the standards of living for Greek citizens. The corruption
inherited from the Ottoman Turk era continues to drain the strength of the
economy in Greece. Today, the Greek economy depends on the shipping
inherited from the Ottoman Turk era, plus tourism. That is insufficient to meet
the needs of the Greek people. Most of all, the Greek people have been
betrayed by their leaders who have led the Greek people to death and ruin.
THE MEGALI IDEA
T
he Megali Idea (Greek: Great Idea) is the irredentist concept of Greek
nationalism that expressed the goal of establishing a Greek state that would
encompass all ethnic Greek-inhabited areas, including the large Greek
populations that, after the restoration of Greek independence in 1830 from
the Ottoman Empire, still lived under Ottoman occupation.
Irredentism (from Italian irredento for ‘unredeemed’) is any political or
popular movement intended to reclaim and reoccupy a lost homeland. As
such irredentism tries to justify its territorial claims on the basis of (real or
imagined) historic and/or ethnic affiliations. It is often advocated by
nationalist and pan-nationalist movements and has been a feature of identity
politics, cultural and political geography.
The term appeared for the first time during the debates of Prime Minister
Ioannis Kolettis with King Otto that preceded the promulgation of the 1844
constitution. This was a visionary nationalist aspiration that was to dominate
foreign relations and, to a significant extent, determine domestic politics of
the Greek state for much of the first century of its independent existence. If
the expression was new in 1844, the concept had roots in the Greek popular
psyche, nurtured as it was by old hopes that had kept hopes of eventual
liberation from Turkish rule. The Greeks hoped to restore the imperial state
like the days of the Byzantines. This is reflected in the folk saying:
“Once more, as years and time go by, once more they shall be ours.”
The Megali Idea implied the goal of reviving the Eastern Roman Byzantine
Empire. The objective was to establish a Greek state which would be, as
ancient geographer Strabo wrote, a Greek world encompassing mostly the
former Byzantine lands from the Ionian Sea to the west, to Turkey and the
Black Sea to the east, and from Thrace, Macedonia and Epirus to the north, to
Crete and Cyprus to the south. This new state would have Constantinople
(Istanbul today) as its capital. The state would be the ‘Greece of Two
Continents and Five Seas’ (Europe and Asia, and the Ionian, Aegean,
Marmara, Black and Libyan Seas, respectively.)
Prime Minister Ioannis Kolettis and King Otto were attempting to unify the
people of a recently liberated nation, Greece. In history we know that leaders
used this technique of a single objective to unify people. Hitler blamed the
Jews for all the problems after World War One in Germany. Iran today
blames their problems on Israel and the U.S. Putin of Russia blames the
West. In Greece, the statement of the Megali Idea was not against anyone, but
did have the desired effect of unifying the Greek people behind their
leadership. The Megali Idea was the statement of a mythical objective
without consideration of the practical realities. The political leaders then and
in subsequent generations had the power they needed to take Greece in the
direction chosen by the leaders.
By contrast, a democracy depends on an informed public that participates
in decision making on behalf of the entire population. Greece did not have an
informed and participating population to prevent mistakes of a few
politicians.
The practical realities of the Megali Idea included issues like minorities to
be dominated by the Greek state. The Greeks did not like living under the
heel of Ottoman authority. However, now the minorities in the Greek state
would live under the Greek authority. Somehow that is acceptable by the
Megali Idea. Certainly in Turkey, for example, there were many Muslim
Turks who would be subjects of the proposed Greek state. There were
Muslim Turks in Crete and Cyprus. There were large concentrations of Jews
in Asia Minor and peoples of other ethnic backgrounds. What rights and
future did they have? What happens if these people who are not ethnic Greek
do not accept the Greek state? In fact, the Muslim Turks in Turkey (Asia
Minor) out numbered the ethnic Greeks.
As a matter of law, the ethnic Greeks living in Turkey had been there for
many generations and were Turkish citizens. They were not recognized in the
law as Greek citizens. Do these Turkish citizens whose ancestors came from
Greece have a vote or say in converting their homeland, Turkey, to become
part of a Greek state? This was never presented to the Greek people when
the Megali Idea was adopted as the foreign policy of Greece by the Greek
politicians.
In the United States there are citizens whose ancestors came from Ireland,
Germany, China and many other countries. They by birth or naturalization are
U.S. citizens and not citizens of the country from which their ancestors came.
This definition of citizenship in international law was not made clear to the
citizens of Greece and to the ethnic Greeks who were citizens of other
countries. The Megali Idea was promoted in Greece without citizenship
being made clear to the Greek citizens.
If the logic of the Greek politicians is adopted, then today Ireland could
claim that New York City is part of Ireland. The Irish claim would be based
on some people living in New York City had grandparents who came to the
U.S. generations earlier. Then we would have to ask in a New York City that
is part of Ireland, what rights do African Americans, Hispanic Americans
and all other Americans have? The same practical problem existed when the
Greek leaders claimed a right to control and dictate the futures of people
beyond the sovereign borders of Greece. Those ethic Greeks in places like
Pontus were Turkish citizens and not Greek citizens just like the ethnic Irish
living in New York City are Americans and not Irish.
There are other huge practical problems with the Megali Idea. Do the
ethnic Greeks who are citizens of other countries like Turkey get to vote or in
some other way participate in the decision to make where they live part of a
Greek state? If the ethnic Greek or other peoples who are not identified as
ethnic Greek resist the imposition of a Greek state upon them, what rights and
future do they have?
In Greece there was substantial support within the population for the
mythical concept of the Megali Idea. However, the prospect that the pursuit
of the Megali Idea might lead to war where many Greeks could die and the
debt would become greater was never debated and put to a vote. The Greek
population was not given an opportunity to decide its future. The political
leadership, with the Greek military acting at the direction of the political
leaders, pressed on with the objective to expand the size of the Greek state.
The Greek sovereign, that is, the Greek people, did not approve by national
referendum of the popular idea.
Greece did expand successfully until 1922, but did not have serious
resistance. Greece annexed the Ionian Islands (1864), Thessaly (1881),
southern Macedonia, Crete, southern Epirus and the Eastern Aegean Islands
(1913), Western Thrace (1920), and the Dodecanese (1947). Crete, for
example, was occupied by Turks from the Ottoman era and ethnic Greeks.
The Turks were forced to leave the island so that only ethnic Greeks
remained. Then Crete became part of Greece. This is what the Greeks
attempted in 1974 in Cyprus.
If we ask people what their objectives are, the answer is peace and
prosperity. People do not want to send their sons and daughters off to war.
That was true in Greece as it is everywhere. It is the political leaders who
create these wars.
“The worst evils which mankind ever had to endure were inflicted by bad
governments. The state can be and has often been in the course of history the
main source of mischief and disaster.” Ludwig von Mises,
Greece for more than 2000 years depended on Turkey as a source of raw
materials. Greece is poor in agriculture and depends on the importation of
food and other items. Greece became and remains a great maritime nation to
support its citizens. So Greek and other European merchants imported grain,
olives, tobacco, rugs and other products from Turkey. The Turks imported
manufactured and processed products in exchange for the raw materials they
exported. Turks on the whole were uneducated in contrast to the Greeks who
were educated. Greeks had friends around the world and access to foreign
markets. The Turks did not have an export industry or ships to deliver their
products. The Turks were dependent on the Greeks.
The Greek leaders starting with Prime Minister Ioannis Kolettis and King
Otto had the option of using military force to acquire foreign lands. The
Greek leaders, following a long history of Byzantine diplomacy, could have
negotiated agreements that built on long-established relationships in Turkey
that would have benefited Greece and made a strong ally of the Turks. That
peaceful option was not considered.
Greece stayed out of World War One until the end of the War. The British
wanted the Greeks to join the Allies to help defeat the Central Powers.
Greece was led by Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos who wanted to join
the Allies. Opposed was King Constantine and his supporters who were
called Royalists. Greece was polarized into two camps, one that supported
the Prime Minister and one that supported the King.
In all wars up to and including World War One victors took spoils from
losers. Prime Minister Venizelos committed Greece to the Allies near the end
of the War so that Greece could sit at the table when the spoils of the War
were divided. World War One ended with the Treaty of Paris. A separate
Treaty of Sevres was drawn for the disposition of Turkey which was an ally
of the Central Powers, that is, Germany. The Treaty of Sevres was signed in
1920 by representatives of the Sultan who was in charge of the Ottoman
Government. The Ottomans were called the sick man of Europe at that time.
The Sultan who was resident in Istanbul had lost control over most of the
country of Turkey. The Treaty provided that Greece could annex Smyrna and
surrounding area, and parts of Turkey would be ceded to Italy, France and
Great Britain. Greece had landed its army in Smyrna in 1919, and the Sultan
dispatched his legendary general of the Turkish Army who had defended
Gallipoli and Istanbul from the British Empire during World War One to
eastern Turkey to disarm the Turkish Army. That general, Mustafa Kemal, did
not disarm the army. He formed the Nationalist Government, and negotiated
an agreement with Russia that occupied Armenia to fix the border. As part of
the agreement the Nationalist Government acquired surplus World War One
arms from the Russians. Then Mustafa Kemal led his army across Turkey to
attack the Greek Army.
The Allies, including Greece, had reached an agreement with the Sultan
who could not enforce the agreement. The Treaty of Sevres was of no value
to the Allies, and the Nationalist Government led by Mustafa Kemal rejected
the Treaty. Now the Greek people and their Army had been led to a war by
the political leaders of Greece, and in particular Prime Minister Venizelos,
without the Greek population being fully informed and without a public vote
to authorize a war.
When Greek forces landed in Smyrna in 1919 General Kemal told the
Turkish forces in the Smyrna area to withdraw inland. That stretched out the
Greek supply lines. The Greek Army moved further inland and were
approaching the capital of the Turkish Nationalist Government, Ankara. The
Greek Army had been in the field in Turkey for three years and longer for
many of the soldiers who had also fought in the Balkans. The soldiers were
hungry and tired. Most just wanted to go home to Greece. Prime Minister
Venizelos had been replaced by King Constantine. The King replaced many
of the leaders in the Army with people loyal to him. Supporters of Venizelos
claimed the replacements were not as qualified as the personnel loyal to
Venizelos. The Turks selected the river at Sakarya to engage the Greek Army.
The location gave the Turks an impenetrable tactical advantage, and the
Greek Army was quickly defeated.
Once the Greek Army was defeated all the Greek Government did was
provide ships to remove the Army from Turkey. No provision was made to
protect or remove the ethnic Greek refugees or any other innocent victims of
the disastrous decisions of the Greek Government. The Greek military should
have established a defensive perimeter around Smyrna using the 200,000
Greek soldiers who were in Turkey. That is a standard military practice, but
the Greek military did nothing to protect the civilians.
The rescue of the Greek civilians and others was conceived and
implemented by a Christian hunch back who had only been in Turkey a few
weeks. He received critical help from Captain Ioannis Theofanides of the
Greek Navy. The Captain was kicked out of the Navy shortly after his heroic
service to his country. This Captain is the real hero of Greece, but the Greek
people today do not know his name. There are no monuments or recognition
in Greece today for the American or Greek Captain. Instead, the Greek
politicians have, for example, named their beautiful airport in Athens after
Eleftherios Venizelos who led so many Greeks to their deaths and their nation
to poverty. The name of the airport should be changed to honor the Greek
Navy Captain, Ioannis Theofanides.
The Megali Idea sounded great to the Greek people when proclaimed by a
politician, but, in fact, led the Greek people to the greatest disaster
conceivable. Greece lost the lives of thousands of soldiers. The ethnic Greek
population, along with the ethnic Armenians and Jews were uprooted and
forced to leave their homeland. Many died, were raped and slaughtered.
Greece lost the bread basket that had fed Greece for over 2000 years. The
Megali Idea was a disaster for Greece of the greatest proportion.
Some say the Megali Idea is dead today, but that is not true. Many Greeks
today still believe in this mythical idea without considering the practical
considerations and consequences. As proof, Cyprus was a British territory
that became an independent country in 1960. Greek Cypriots greatly
outnumber Turkish Cypriots. The first President was Archbishop Makarios.
He at first promoted the idea of enosis which means unification with Greece.
The Turkish Cypriots did not want to become Greeks. Greek Army personnel
joined Greek Cypriots in a coup of President Makarios in 1974, and a war
broke out between the two populations. Britain, Greece and Turkey had
committed in 1960 to guarantee the sovereignty of all citizens of Cyprus.
Britain and Greece took no action to stop the killing. Turkey during the night
landed its Army in 1974 to stop the fighting. The Greek Cypriots from all
over the island were moved to south Cyprus, and the Turkish Cypriots to
north Cyprus. A fence line that reminds us of the Berlin Wall separates the
two populations, and the border is guarded by U.N. forces to this day. The
Turkish Army remains on the island to protect the safety and rights of the
Turkish Cypriot minority. Attempts at unification to date have failed, but
continue. The Greek Cypriot version of the Megali Idea is called enosis.
Many Greek Cypriots, despite their suffering, still support unification with
Greece, and simply want the Turkish Cypriots to leave Cyprus like the Turks
left Crete.
Greek Cypriots are Christians. Most belong to the Eastern Orthodox
Church. They believe in the teachings of Jesus Christ, but their actions
regarding Turkish Cypriots have been contrary to the teachings of Jesus
Christ. The religious leaders, that is, priests, have supported actions that are
contrary to the teachings of Jesus Christ. The obstacle to a better future for
all Cypriots is the attitude that is founded on the Megali Idea. The Megali
Idea is alive and well among Greeks.
The negotiations between Greek Cypriot political leaders and Turkish
political leaders can be summarized very simply. The Greek Cypriots have
continually engaged in circuitous and devious Byzantine negotiation tactics
with the sole purpose of frustrating the Turkish Cypriots. The Turkish
Cypriots do not understand the Greek Cypriot leaders or how to deal with
them. The Turkish Cypriot position is there will be an agreement when the
Greek Cypriots agree to all the terms of the Turkish Cypriots. That approach
does not work at home with their wives, and so it will not with the Greek
Cypriots. The endemic Turkish mentality was necessary and successful when
defending Gallipoli, but does not work when negotiating. Both sides would
benefit by focusing on the common good that will advance all Cypriots, and
make offers that benefit the other party without creating great damage to the
party that makes the offer. Call this a Christian approach, if you like. Public
polls show that some 60% of the Greek Cypriots oppose a unification with
the Turkish Cypriots. That suggests that any agreement made by the current
leaders under the auspices of the United Nations will be rejected at the polls
as it was by the Greek Cypriots previously. The American Christian
leadership that was present in Smyrna in 1922 is absent from Cyprus today.
Today the Greek people, a proud people, are on their knees poor and
struggling. The destruction of the Greek economy started with the ill
conceived adventure into Turkey in 1919 and has continued with generations
of politicians who have been less than honest with the public. The politicians
have promised what they cannot deliver, and the people are suffering. Seeing
such wonderful, proud people in such a wretched condition is very sad.
Albert Einstein, perhaps the most intelligent man of the 20th century, said:
“Only two things are infinite, the universe and human stupidity, and I’m not
sure about the former.”
THE GREEK ARMY ENTERS SMYRNA
O
n May 15, 1919 the first units of the Greek Army landed in Smyrna,
Turkey. The Allied Powers authorized the occupation and creation of the
Zone of Smyrna during negotiations regarding the partition of the Ottoman
Empire to protect the ethnic Greek population living in and around the city
The Treaty of Sevres dated August 10, 1920, which was more than a year
after the Greek Army had landed in Smyrna, placed the city of Smyrna and
territory around the city as defined in Article 66 under the control of the
Greeks. J.C. Hurewitz, Diplomacy in the Near and Middle East, Volume II,
(Princeton, New Jersey: D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., 1956)
What gave the Allied Powers this authority? The answer begins with the
definition of sovereignty. Sovereignty is “the power to govern; supreme
political authority. That public authority which commands in civil society,
and orders and directs what each citizen is to perform to obtain the end of its
institution.” James A. Ballentine, Ballentine’s Law Dictionary, Third
Edition, (Rochester, New York: The Lawyers Co-operative Publishing
Company, 1969) p. 1196
Also according to Ballentine, a sovereign state is defined as “a people
permanently occupying a fixed territory, bound together by common laws,
habits, and customs into one body politic, exercising through the medium of
an organized government, independent sovereignty and control over all
persons and things within its boundaries, capable of making war and peace,
and of entering into international relations with other communities.” p. 1196
By 1919 the Sultan had become so weak that he was unable to exercise
sovereign authority over the Turkish people. He had agreed to be an ally of
Germany in World War One as one of the Central Powers, but Turkey was not
the Ottoman power of old. He no longer had command and control over the
institutions of government and people of Turkey. One of those institutions in
most countries is the police. Ottoman Turkey had an army, but there were not
police departments in each town and village. The National Police Academy
was not founded until 1937. Differences between people were settled
privately.
“It has been estimated that about 20 per cent of the population of Anatolia
died violently during the last ten years (1912-1922) of the Ottoman empire’s
existence; some 2.5 million Muslims, up to 800,000 Armenians and 300,000
Greeks.” Bruce Clark, Twice a Stranger, (Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Harvard University Press, 2006) p. 13.
People were killing each other between 1912 and 1922 for their own
reasons, and there was no police force or government institution to stop the
violence. This was not a genocide as claimed by the Armenians, for their
own purposes, but rather an absence of civil order. More Muslims died than
Armenians and Greeks combined. The 300,000 were Turkish citizens of
Greek ancestry. Most had no connection to Greece, except their religion and
cultural customs, and some did not speak Greek.
There was no sovereign authority controlling most of Turkey. The political
authorities of Greece decided it was the obligation of Greece to protect this
group of Turkish citizens who were ethnic Greeks. Greece would become the
policeman of the Turks.
The Central Powers lost World War One and were at the mercy of the
Allied Powers. The Sultan signed the Treaty of Sevres in theory as the
sovereign power in Turkey. In fact, he did not control Turkey. The Sultan was
so weak that he left Turkey forever on November 17, 1922. The Nationalist
Government led by Mustafa Kemal rejected the Treaty of Sevres.
However, Greece, Italy, France and Britain did not meet the tests to be the
sovereign power in Turkey either. Sovereignty rests with the power that can
defend the territory. So Greece, Italy, France and Britain staked their claims
in Turkey. The U.S., which was one of the Allied Powers, did not make any
claim to acquire Turkish territory. In fact, during World War One when the
U.S. technically was at war with the Ottomans U.S. missionaries worked in
Turkey supporting the Turkish citizens. The friendly relations and reputation
of the Americans were to pay huge dividends later.
Article 66 describes the boundaries around Smyrna which were to be the
limits of Greek territory. The eastern border was the town of Salihli. That is
approximately 55 miles, or 88 kilometers, almost due east of Smyrna (Izmir
today). The Greek Army occupied Turkey well beyond the limits established
in Article 66. Any territory conquered by the Greeks would have to be
defended in order to establish sovereignty. A defense is normally based on a
natural barrier like a sea, large river or mountains. The politicians of Greece
who were excellent negotiators and diplomats, but who lacked military
experience, pressed the Greek army to expand into the interior of Turkey
without consideration of how sovereignty could be defended.
The details of Article 66 Treaty of Sevres appear as “Sevres Treaty: Part
III HR www.hri.org/docs/sevres/part3.htm.”
The Greek Army advance was stopped in 1921 at the Sakarya River near
Polatli. That is 50 miles from the capital of the Nationalist Government of
Turkey, and 277 miles from Smyrna (Izmir). The Greeks had far exceeded the
limits to their expansion that they and the Allies had agreed upon. There was
no authorization by any government for this intrusion into Turkey. More
important than the legal issue was the intrusion proved Mustafa Kemal was
correct when he pronounced in June 1919 that the independence of Turkey
was in danger. The Greeks were creating a supreme leader of the Turks.
The uneducated and unorganized poor Turkish citizens whose nationalistic
spirit had been ignited in 1919 were now on fire. Asa K. Jennings on
February 29 and March 1, 1928, wrote the “Report for Mrs. Emmons Blaine
of Work Accomplished in Smyrna, Turkey” in which he said:
A new Turkish army, under the leadership of Kemal, had brought about a
revolution, and while branded by the Sultan as an outlaw and a
revolutionary leader, upon whose head he placed a price, and had given
strict orders that if possible he should be captured and executed, Kemal
continued to gather about him increasing numbers of the Turkish people
and enlarged his army until it became so strong that they not only were
able to stop the advance of the Greek armies, which had come to a
dangerous nearness to the temporary capital at Angora (Ankara), but they
were able to hold their ground and even force a retreat.
Women and children, old men, any person who could carry a gun
volunteered for service. Resting for some time on their arms, but working
meanwhile to better prepare themselves for their final aggressive advance,
they created a wonderful esprit de corps.
The Greeks mistook their inactivity for either lack of ability to advance, or
a desire not to push their efforts. And as a result, the Greek army became
divided, for they had political differences of their own, and were not
prepared to withstand the advance of the Turkish army, reorganized and
refreshed, when at last in 1922 Kemal gave the order to advance
The Turks had been subject to military discipline for 623 years, followed
orders, and were loyal to their leaders, but they were still a pickup citizen
army of volunteers who joined the campaign as it marched forward. By
contrast, the Greek army was considered a world-class army that had been
fighting in the Balkans and Turkey for ten years. The Turks followed Mustafa
Kemal not out of obedience, but out of respect and belief in him as a leader.
They respected his word as law. To this day, all Turks hold Mustafa Kemal
Ataturk in the highest regard and most display his photograph in their
businesses. This respect for authority is part of the Turkish persona that
exists today. After the Smyrna tragedy when the mullahs were speaking up
against Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, he did not tolerate such dissension and
closed the mosques and banished the mullahs. He had witnessed the political
dissension created in Greece by the priests, and would not allow that in
Turkey. That is when he banned the fez, liberated women and made many
more social changes. The Turkish Republic was formed as a secular
government unlike other Middle Eastern countries and the influence of the
Orthodox Church in Greek politics.
Asa Jennings went on to say in his Report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine:
The partitioning out and assigning to various Powers the zones of influence
in Turkey left that country with practically nothing at all except the
hinterland, which the Turkish leaders refused to accept.
The educated Turkish people, and the real Turkish leaders felt that a great
injustice had been done them and would not submit to it. Under the
leadership of Mustapha Kemal Pasha, they went out in the spirit of ’76 to
save their land.
The spirit of ’76 is a reference to the American Revolution of 1776 when
American citizens joined together to drive the British Army out of the
American Colonies.
All the Greeks wanted when they landed in 1919 were Smyrna and the rich
hinterland. From the Report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine:
Smyrna is the metropolis of the Near East, the most important city, and the
oldest one. When the first historian wrote his first surviving record,
Smyrna was standing at the head of a deep inlet on the Aegean coast of
Asia Minor, partially protected from danger of the sea by a land-locked
harbor.
The wealth of the surrounding country has been her bane and her blessing
from the beginning. From the time men learned to paddle until they crossed
the ocean in oil burning ships, the quest of the Golden Fleece has brought
them to the shores of Asia Minor. Pirates and privateers have come by
water, and hordes of barbarians and others by land through Europe to Asia.
Smyrna has been looted and burned and partially destroyed by conquering
armies time after time in her long career. In self-protection she has fought
and bled throughout the centuries. Unlike her sister cities of old, she has
never died of her wounds. Her bones have never been picked by vultures,
nor buried by the dusts of time and finally dug up by archaeologists.
Smyrna is one of the living wonders of the world, and the wonder is that
she stayed on the surface of the earth, retaining her place, name and
commerce, at times almost reduced to a vanishing point, and then coming
back.
It will be recalled that Smyrna is the location of one of the Seven Churches
of Asia, about which John wrote. Here the apostle Paul and the Beloved
Disciple John lived and died. Polycarp, a convert of St. John, became the
first Bishop, and the Patron Saint of Smyrna; and was martyred there in
155, an old man; and his grave may be seen to this day at the head of the
ancient stadium in which he was burned at the stake.
Smyrna has been known as pagan and Christian Smyrna. It may be known
now, perhaps, as Moslem Smyrna. It has had all sorts of political control
in its day, but one thing is characteristic of the Smyrnites, that is, that they
are faithful, faithful to the government under which they find themselves
living, and to the religious belief of their fathers.
The Beloved Disciple John, when he wrote to the Seven Churches of Asia
from the island of Patmos, had this characteristic in mind concerning
Smyrna, in these words: ‘Be thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a
crown of life.’ (Revelations 1-10).
Why, then, did the Greek government have its Army go beyond the limits to
territorial expansion the Greeks had agreed to? Greece had the pearl of the
Mediterranean. Is that not beauty enough? Ego has no limit. Ego trumps logic.
Greek Admiral “Dannys” Theofanides, Grandson of the Greek hero
Captain Ioannis Theofanides, said in his home in Athens in 2013 that the
Greek military could have defended Smyrna and area immediately
surrounding Smyrna from the Turkish army. The mighty Greek navy could be
of no help when the fighting is 277 miles from Izmir, and the Greek army was
less effective with such long supply lines.
When the Greek troops entered Smyrna on May 15, 1919, the ethnic Greek
population celebrated. Greek flags were displayed. The Greek Orthodox
Metropolitan of Smyrna, Chrysostomos of Smyrna, blessed the first troops as
they arrived.
An inexperienced colonel was in charge of the operation and neither the
appointed High Commissioner nor high-ranking military individuals were
there for the landing resulting in miscommunication and a breakdown of
discipline. Most significantly, this resulted in the 1/38 Evzone Regiment
landing north of where they were to take up their post. As a result, they had to
march south passing a large part of the Greek celebratory crowds and the
Ottoman governor’s konak (official residence) and the barracks of Ottoman
troops.
Someone fired a shot and chaos resulted with the Greek troops firing
multiple shots into the konak and the barracks. The Ottoman troops
surrendered and the Greek regiment began marching them up the coast to a
ship to serve as a temporary prison. A British citizen at the scene claimed he
witnessed the shooting deaths by both Greeks in the crowd and Greek troops
of 30 unarmed surrendered prisoners during this march. British officers in the
harbor reported seeing Greek troops bayoneting multiple Turkish prisoners
during the march and then saw them thrown into the sea.
In the chaos throughout the day, looting of Turkish houses began and by the
end of the day 300 to 400 Turkish citizens had been killed, 100 Greeks were
killed, including 2 troops. Violence continued the next day and for the next
months as Greek troops took over towns and villages in the region. Atrocities
were committed by both ethnic groups, notably at the Battle of Aydin on June
27, 1919.
Aydin is located 55 miles southeast of Izmir, almost due east of Ephesus
(Kusadasi in Turkish), the last known residence of the Virgin Mary.
After its occupation of Smyrna, the Greek army had started to advance into
inner Western Anatolia from the first day of their landing at Smyrna and the
incursion had extended into the Menderes valley in the second week of the
occupation. Aydin, the central city of the region, was occupied on May 27.
The rapid advance of Greek troops into the country had increased the
agitation of the population.
The principal source on the fighting and the massacres remains the Report
of the Inter-Allied Commission of Inquiry of October 1919. The report was
prepared by four generals of the Allied powers following their on-the-spot
checks. That report included:
Throughout the Aydin region the population was armed, Turks as well as
Greeks. The Greek Command also erred in tolerating the action of armed
Greek civilians, armed by Greece since February, who, under the pretext
of assisting the Greek troops, began looting and committing all manner of
excesses.
The warfare around Aydin was started by an ambush on June 27, 1919 of a
Greek patrol by irregular Turkish forces.
In the course of reconnaissance patrols around Aydin, some of the villages
were burned down by Greek detachments. They were repulsed. On June
28, the attackers began to use 105-mm guns. Some of the fires that broke
out in the quarter of Cuma, one of Aydin’s Turkish quarters, in the morning
of June 29 started during this engagement. Other fires also broke out in this
quarter at various isolated points. A large number of Turkish men, women
and children who were trying to leave the burning quarter were killed for
no reason by the Greek soldiers, who were guarding all the exits that led
from this quarter to the northern part of the town. The report observes that
there was no doubt that the Greek Command and troops ran amok. The
Greeks evacuated the town in the night of June 29 and early hours of June
30 after having committed numerous attacks and other crimes. A large
number of Greek civilians hoping to escape by accompanying the troops as
they retreated were prevented from doing so by the Command.
A subsequent fire in the Greek quarter was started by Turkish gangs under
their leader once they took control of the city. The gangs entered the
quarter in the morning of June 30 and burnt it down after having looted the
houses, killing the occupants. Irrespective of age or sex, a number of
Greek inhabitants encountered by the gangs as they roamed through the
town were ruthlessly killed. Around 2000 or 3000 inhabitants were
robbed but not killed. They had managed to take refuge in the French
convent before the gangs arrived, after which they sought the protection of
the Commander of the small Ottoman Division present in the city.
The Greek troops, with the help of reinforcements recaptured Aydin on
July 4. The reoccupation of Aydin was ordered by the Greek High
Command in spite of the express orders of the representative of the Entente
(Allied Powers). The Greek authorities acted on orders received from
Venizelos in Paris on July 2. These orders prevented the representative of
the Entente from intervening in the matter. Once in Aydin, the Greeks set
fire to the Turkish quarter situated in the western part of the town where
there were also some Greek factories.
According to the Inter-Allied Inquiry Commission report, all the fires that
were started between June 29 and July 4 most probably had destroyed two
thirds of the city of Aydin, which had a population of 20,000, including some
8000 Greeks.
Most of the villages situated along the railway track between Balacik and
Aydin were also destroyed by fires started in the course of military
operations that took place in the region. The occupation of the vilayet of
Aydin by the Greek forces had caused significant material losses to crops
and property, some attributable to looting, theft and the destruction of
livestock. Considerable losses were also suffered due to the burning of
houses, villages and the town of Aydin.
Before the Greek army returned to Aydin, most of the Turkish population
had already left the town and surrounding area in order to take refuge in
the Italian zone or in the Nazilli-Denizli region, where they remained until
the end of the war.
On the other hand, the Greek population of the town was either massacred
by the Turks or taken to captivity in the interior of Anatolia.
This violence resulted in decreased international support for the
occupation and a rise of Turkish nationalism. The landing and reports of the
violence had a large impact on many parties. The landing helped bring
together the various groups of Turkish resistance into an organized
movement, and that was further assisted by the landing of Mustafa Kemal in
Samsun on May 19, 1919.
As a response to the claims of violence, the French Prime Minister
Clemenceau suggested an Interallied Commission of Inquiry to Smyrna. The
commission was made up of Admiral Mark Lambert Bristol for the United
States, General Bunoust for France, General Hare for England, General
Dall’olio for Italy and, as a non-voting observer, Colonel Mazarakis for
Greece. It began work in August 1919 and interviewed 175 witnesses and
visited multiple sites of alleged atrocities. The decision reached was that
when a Greek witness and Turkish witness disagreed, a European witness
would be used to provide the conclusions for the report. The report was
released to negotiators in October and generally found Greeks responsible
for the bloodshed related to the landing and the violence throughout the
Smyrna zone after the landing. In addition, the conclusions questioned the
fundamental justification for the Greek occupation and suggested Greek
troops be replaced by an allied force. In the negotiations after the report,
Clemenceau reminded Venizelos that the occupation of Smyrna was not
permanent and merely a political solution. Venizelos responded angrily and
the negotiators moved on. This report is on the internet as “Documents of the
Inter-Allied Commission of Inquiry.”
At about the same time, British Field Marshal George Milne was tasked
by the allies with devising a solution to Italian and Greek tension in the
Menderes River Valley. Milne warned in his report that Turkish guerrilla
action would continue as long as the Greeks continued to occupy Smyrna and
questioned the justification for Greek occupation. Most importantly, his
report developed a border that would separate the Smyrna zone from the rest
of Anatolia. The council of Great Britain, France, U.S. and Italy approved
the Milne line beyond which Greek troops were not to cross, except to
pursue attackers but not more than 3 km beyond the line. On July 22, 1920,
Greek military divisions crossed the Milne line around the Smyrna zone and
began military operations in the rest of Anatolia.
Aristidis Stergiadis was appointed the High Commissioner of Smyrna in
February and arrived in the city four days after the May 15 landing.
Stergiadis immediately went to work in setting up an administration, easing
ethnic violence, and making way for permanent annexation of Smyrna.
Stergiadis immediately punished the Greek soldiers responsible for violence
on May 15-16 with court martial and created a commission to decide on
payment for victims (made up of representatives from Great Britain, France,
Italy and other allies). Stergiadis took a strict stance against discrimination
of the Turkish population and opposed church leaders and the local Greek
population on a number of occasions. This stance against discrimination of
the Turkish population often pitted Stergiadis against the local Greek
population, the church and the army. He reportedly would carry a stick
through the town with which he would beat Greeks that were being abusive
to Turkish citizens. At one point, Stergiadis interrupted and ended a sermon
by the bishop Chrysostomos that he believed to be incendiary. Troops would
disobey his orders to not abuse the Turkish population often putting him in
conflict with the military.
THE GREEK ARMY IS DEFEATED
P
rior to the Greek army landing in Turkey King Constantine and his
followers, the Royalists, opposed putting Greek troops in Turkey. The King’s
political opponent, Prime Minister Venizelos pressed ahead with the plan,
and King Constantine was forced to leave Greece. By 1920, the Greek
population turned against Venizelos and his Liberal Party. The United
Opposition won, and even Venizelos himself failed to retain his seat. The
United Opposition made the election a referendum on King Constantine I who
was very popular. The Greek army had been fighting for 10 years in the
Balkans and Turkey, and the population was war weary. The United
Opposition had promised to withdraw the army from Asia Minor and secure
peace with the Turks. With the defeat of Venizelos, King Constantine was
recalled and became in charge of the Greek government. Rather than
withdraw the Greek troops from Turkey, the King chose to press on with the
attack on Turkey.
Greek history was repeated in the 1964 U.S. Presidential elections. The
Republican, Barry Goldwater, said he would put 500,000 troops in Vietnam,
if elected. The Democrat, Lyndon Johnson, said he would pull the troops out
of Vietnam, if he was elected. The American people, like the Greeks of 1920,
wanted to stop the war and get the troops out of Vietnam. The U.S. voted
overwhelmingly in favor of Johnson, 42 million votes vs. 27 million for
Goldwater and 486 Electoral votes vs. 52 Electoral votes. Once Johnson
was elected, he did exactly what Goldwater had promised and flooded
Vietnam with U.S. troops. Turkey was the Vietnam of Greece.
*************
The Greek army enjoyed success as they moved further into the interior of
Turkey. With King Constantine as Supreme Commander of the Greek Forces,
the Greek army started an offensive on July 16, 1921. The Greek army
defeated the Turkish army at Eskisehir. The Greek army was 258 miles from
Izmir. The Turk in charge of the Turkish forces in the field was Ismet Inonu,
the trusted confidant of Mustafa Kemal. Inonu wanted to continue the fight,
and fight until the end. That is a characteristic of the Turkish persona. That
characteristic explains why Turks have been unsuccessful negotiating with
Greeks in places like Cyprus. But, Mustafa Kemal was a Turk like no other.
Mustafa Kemal overruled Inonu, and ordered him to withdraw despite
heavy losses. There was an option. Kemal wanted to preserve what was left
of the Turkish army, and mount a defense in a location where the Turkish
forces would have a tactical advantage. He chose the Sakarya River. This
location provided the last natural barrier to the Greek army conquering
Ankara, the capital of the National Government of Turkey. The Turkish
forces, with Mustafa Kemal in command, would have the high ground and be
in protected positions shooting down on the attacking Greek troops who had
no protection. The Turkish position would be similar to Gallipoli where the
weaker Turkish forces rained terror on the Allies during World War One, and
defeated the Allies. The Mustafa Kemal plan was successful, and the Greeks
were forced to retreat starting on September 14, 1921.
Mustafa Kemal returned to the capital, Ankara, in triumph where the Grand
National Assembly awarded him the rank of Field Marshal of the Army and
the title of Gazi. He was the hero of the Turkish people for saving their
nation. The miscalculation of King Constantine had helped to promote
Mustafa Kemal to legendary status.
The final decisive defeat for the Greek army was at the Battle of
Dumlupinar. Dumlupinar is 171 miles (276 km) from Smyrna (Izmir). The
Greek army of 200,000 was exhausted, hungry, mentally defeated. Most
soldiers just wanted to go home to Greece. The Turkish army of 104,000 was
highly motivated to drive the Greeks from Turkey despite lack of arms and
supplies. The Turks had surrendered all the territories of the Ottoman empire
like Syria, Iraq, and more, but they were determined not to surrender the
Motherland. The rallying call became “Turkey for the Turks.” Mustafa Kemal
ordered that the Greeks must be driven into the Aegean Sea. The Turkish
offensive started on August 26, 1922, and was over very quickly.
The Greek front line broke, and the retreat was a panic stricken,
disorganized event. The Greek officers under King Constantine did not
maintain discipline and organization during the retreat. Normally an army
would withdraw to a defensive line while most of the army and civilians
withdraw even further. There a second defensive line would be established
so that the first defensive line could withdraw to safety. Such a leap-frog
approach provides the best defense during a retreat. However, the Greeks
did not follow this standard approach. Many of the Greek soldiers just threw
down their arms to make travel easier as they started the long run and walk to
Smyrna. Some of the Greeks committed the worst atrocities. Turkish homes
were looted. Turks were raped and killed. Farms and homes were burned to
the ground. The advancing Turkish forces witnessed the destruction of the
Turkish people and property.
A British citizen, William Ferguson whose uncle was Dr. MacLachlan, the
President of the American International College in Paradise, was
interviewed after his rescue. His grandmother was born in Thessaloniki,
Greece. Mr. Ferguson said:
When the Greeks started retreating, the Turks had everything to their
advantage, because they had their own supplies nearby. The Greeks were
dependent on supplies coming up 200 miles from Smyrna and they didn’t
have their means of getting them up and they just got away as fast as they
could; got on any trains they could get and Greek refugees from the
villages along the railroad got on the trains and came down to Smyrna as
quickly as they could.
When the refugees started coming down on the train through Smyrna, the
weather had become very, very hot. It was September and we were having
dry winds. The boys, Jim and Douglas, and other boys around there, took
cans of water up to the train and gave the refugees water to drink, because
they were all gasping for water. Then in a day or two things were getting
worse. The Turkish armies were getting closer down and the Greek armies
retreating. Finally, the last Greek army seemed to have got stuck on the
way down and the Turkish army got in ahead of them and stopped them
when they were about five or ten miles up the railway line from Paradise.
On a Sunday we were sitting at dinner at our house about noon or one
o’clock when we heard quick firing from guns. Then the American Marine
officer (he means U.S. Navy) came over and told us to bring the family at
once over to the college, because it wasn’t safe to remain in the house. So
we got up and left dinner on the table, took our Greek servant along and
went over into the main building of the college, into the basement there,
and listened to the shells going over the college, back and forth between
the Greeks and the Turks. Finally that stopped and the Turkish army came
and camped all around the campus where we had about two or three
thousand refugees, Greeks and Armenians who had come in during the
previous two weeks for their protection.
Fortunately, Dr. MacLachlan was a very wise man and a good leader. He
had all the people searched for guns or knives or anything that could do
bodily harm and made a collection of these outside the engine room of the
college. When the Turkish army got to surround the campus, Dr.
MacLachlan took a Turkish boy with him, one of the students, and went out
and met the general in charge of the army and explained the situation. The
Turkish general apparently agreed that nothing would be done so long as
he knew no opposition would be shown by the refugees within the college
campus. Dr. MacLachlan gave him his word for that.
That Sunday night our family slept in the living room of the MacLachlan
house on the campus. I listened to the communication going on between the
sergeant, the Marine sergeant (actually, a petty officer of the U.S. Navy)
who was up on the tower of the college, and the lieutenant who was in
command down on the campus. They were exchanging messages. The
flagship, American flagship in the Smyrna Harbor, was sending up
messages by semaphore, whatever it was, to the campus, telling us what to
do.
The first thing in the morning I got out and climbed up to the top of the
college tower and looked around and saw little fires burning in the
vineyards all around. These had little houses for the caretakers to live in
and the Turks had evidentially got in there and had either chased out or
killed the caretakers and set fire to their homes. When I saw that I feared
the worst so I got down and contacted some of the American professors
who were going to go down by train to Smyrna to help treat the refugees
who had come down by the thousands and were all camped all along the
three mile key, right up to sea in Smyrna.
I asked them to contact the British Consul, to tell him our predicament.
They said they would. In about two hours the British Consul General, Sir
Harry Mann, came up in a certain passenger car with a Turkish guard and a
big Turkish flag on the hood and drove into the campus. I saw him and he
called me over and said ‘Where’s your family?’ “Get them together; get
them in here because we’ve got to take you down to Smyrna. I can’t spend
more than ten minutes here. Get them quickly.’ They were taken to the post
office.
On Wednesday morning I saw signs of fire up in what I thought was the
Turkish or Armenian quarter, up by the French railroad station. Two
officers from the British flagship came ashore and came up to the post
office and asked me if I could get them onto the roof so they could see
where the fire was. I saw what appeared to be the beginning of two fires.
Then the fire got nearer, nearer, and nearer. I was escorted and taken to the
British flagship which was out about two miles in the harbor and there
were thousands and thousands of refugees around at the time. Some of them
begged to be taken on board. They wouldn’t allow any and some of them
jumped and tried to swim alongside and they were forced off. A good
many were drunk.
Once on the British ship, I went down and washed up and came back up on
deck and by that time the fire, which had been close to the post office when
I left, had now got down as far as the key which was about another 100
yards so there was nothing between the sea, nothing to protect the refugees
who were there by the thousands from being injured by the flames from the
fire.
Then the various admirals of the different foreign fleets that were in the
harbor agreed to send boats to pick up refugees who were brought onto our
ship to find out what they wanted, where they wanted to go. I was glad to
be able to do a little interpreting for some of them but it was pretty
miserable. Children without parents, parents without children, women
without husbands. Didn’t know where they were.
Mr. Ferguson was taken with his family to Malta.
The New York Times on September 27, 1922, ran the story “Says Greeks
Burned and Pillaged Turkey.”
London, Sept. 26 – Strong criticism of the behavior of Greek troops in the
Near East was made by Viscount St. Davids, who presided today at the
semi-annual meeting of the Board of directors of the Ottoman Railway,
which operates from Smyrna to Aidan, in Asia Minor. The Viscount said:
The Greeks in their retreat burned every village they saw. They robbed
individual Turks, and when these resisted they killed them. They did all
this near the front and without military necessity. They did it out of sheer
maliciousness. Our reports are that it was done systematically by regular
troops under orders. It was done by the malice of men who knew they
could not hold the country and meant to make it worthless for any one else.
The Greeks took from Smyrna a number of leading Turks and deported
them to Athens, Viscount St. Davids declared.
’The Greeks deserved all they got and more,’ he said. ‘King Constantine’s
servants are very bad fighters, but they are first class at robbery, arson and
murder.’
The speaker said that the Greeks were now quiet, but that the Armenians
had resorted to bomb throwing and in many ways prompted the chances of
massacre.
With an army of 200,000, and a powerful Greek navy at their back, the
Greek army could have established a defensive line around Smyrna to protect
their prize and approximately 500,000 civilians. They did not. The soldiers
walked past Smyrna to Cesme, a town 54 miles (87 km) west of Smyrna.
There the soldiers boarded ships and returned to Greece. The Greek military
and politicians had lost complete control over the situation and their military.
The Greek military leaving Turkey to save their own lives and to return
home without regard to the risk to the civilians in the city of Smyrna was
disgraceful. After all the killing, destruction and rapes committed by the
Greeks, the civilian population in Smyrna was at great risk. The first Turks to
reach Smyrna were the chetahs. They were irregular, wild and undisciplined
soldiers whose motivation was looting, raping and killing. There was no
organized government force in the city to prevent the worst conduct. In the
Armenian community of Smyrna a voluntary group was formed to resist and
fight back, but they were too few and too weak to secure the safety of the city.
From a report written by Asa K. Jennings for Mrs. Emmons Blaine:
Not only was the Greek army not prepared for this, but the nearly half a
million people living in Smyrna were also not prepared. The population of
Smyrna consisted not only of Greeks, Armenians and Turks, but of Italians
and English and various other European nationalities. American
educational and philanthropic institutions as well as business interests
were found there.
It was in August that we heard of the break, and not long after we began to
see retreating Greek soldiers coming into Smyrna. Their numbers
increased until the later part of August and the first of September in 1922
when Greek and Armenian civilians as well as Greek soldiers were taking
leave of Smyrna as fast as available ships would permit.
Greeks Hand Over Smyrna to Allies
At last came the main army of the Greeks. They were being pushed by the
oncoming victorious Turkish army; but in their disastrous retreat the
Greeks unfortunately burned the villages and cities through which they
came, and caused their compatriots or the so-called Christian populations
to leave their homes and to flee with them to the sea.
Terrible stories are current in Smyrna of the condition of the Turkish
people resulting from the treatment by the Greek army during the retreat.
We have heard only what happened to Christian women and girls at the
hands of the Turkish soldiers, but it is equally true that these same things
happened to Turkish women and girls by so called Christian armies.
Maddened by what they saw, the oncoming Turkish army was prepared for
the eventualities about which many of us in America have read only one
phase.
As Americans, however, we were not interested in the political situation
as such, but we were interested in the great humanitarian needs that
developed then in Smyrna, with the hordes of refugees that had poured in
from every quarter, and the precarious conditions of these people upon the
arrival of the Turkish army, with the state of mind already described.
Many expected dire things to happen the first day that the Turkish troops
entered, which was September 9, 1922.
I happened to be one of the many who were standing on the quay at Smyrna
when the first of the Turkish troops entered, and I must say that the entry
was accomplished in a most orderly way, and although when the first of
the troops entered Smyrna bombs were thrown and several were killed,
they did not halt or seek vengeance, but marched on to their destination
which was the government and military headquarters in the city of Smyrna.
Asa Jennings and his family had been transferred by the YMCA (Young
Men’s Christian Association) during August to Smyrna from Czechoslovakia
to be the Boys’ Work Secretary. He knew no one. He had never been to
Turkey or Greece, and spoke no Greek or Turkish. The family moved into a
house at the International College in the Paradise suburb of Smyrna known
today in Turkish as Sirinyer. Upon his arrival, the YMCA employee senior to
Asa, E. O. “Jake” Jacob, left on vacation. Asa was in charge of Y
operations.
During August when the developing humanitarian crisis was obvious, Asa
formed the American Relief Committee. The members were all Americans.
Professor Caleb Lawrence was the agreed upon Chairman. Committees were
formed for different functions. One of the members worked for Standard Oil.
Each was asked to do what he could. Asa had the YMCA Chevy. So he was
appointed to gather flour and fuel to feed the growing masses. Giving each
person an assignment was Asa’s method of leadership to get people involved
and committed.
Darius A. Davis was Senior Secretary for Europe for the Young Men’s
Christian Associations of North America located in Geneva, Switzerland.
Sarah C. Jacob, wife of described “Jake” Jacob wrote the following letter to
D.A. Davis to describe the escalating crisis in Smyrna. Athens, September
14th, 1922:
Dear Mr. Davis,
Last night at 8 o’clock, Philip and I with other American families left
Smyrna on the American Destroyer Simpson. As we left, Smyrna was
burning–a bank of flames in the rear, fanned by a strong wind toward the
sea; the sea in front, the quay all along the water-front, absolutely packed
with people, stretching their arms to heaven and the few boats in the
harbor. God grant that it may not have been the Turkish plan to surround
and finish all that night. Jake, Jennings, Fisher and all the Paradise men
remained. Also, I think, the two YWCA Secretaries.
Jake asked that as quickly as possible I get off to you a full report of all
that has happened and what they have tried to do in the way of relief. I
shall relate only what I have seen, or know to be absolute facts. What Jake
and I have seen is typical of what has gone on everywhere.
Jake was finishing his second week of vacation at Phocia Saturday,
September 2nd, when rumors began to float about that the Phocia
population was fearing “chettas” (brigands). Jake went to talk with the
Mayor and the Chief of Police and learned that there had really been some
disaffection in the Greek army, and that Afion Kara Hissar had fallen and
the army was retreating, but that everyone expected it to stop at the line of
the Sevres Treaty. Smyrna people who came up for Sunday reported some
panicky feeling in the city, and fear that our Phocia boats might be
requisitioned. But an assuring letter of Friday from Mr. Jennings made us
feel that unless we receive telegraphic word from him there was no reason
for leaving until the end of the week, as we had planned, as we know that
we could, if necessary, take a sail boat to Smyrna.
Monday, September 4th. The regular Monday morning boat passed Phocia
without stopping, leaving families stranded on the quay. We supposed it
was requisitioned. Yet, to our surprise and, at first, relief, we saw it turn
into Phocia on schedule and return on time Monday night at ten thirty. Jake
and Mr. Birge went out to it for news from Smyrna. (We had taken a five or
six mile walk up into the mountains at sunset and everything was so quiet
and normal that we could not believe that there was much anxiety. The
farmers and villagers were in their homes and no apparent excitement).
There were no direct messages on the boat to any of us – there were in
Phocia Americans from the YMCA, the ACI (American Collegiate
Institute) and the International College. However, a young Englishman – a
stranger to most of us – was on board claiming to be the bearer of a
message to all of us. It was that the morale of the Greek army was
completely broken, the soldiers were throwing their arms and running, and
refugees were pouring into the city, and the Turks might be there in a week.
Thinking that there would be no other regular boat from Phocia, he had
helped to get the promise of a British war boat to come down next morning
and bring British and Americans with hand baggage – but no servants nor
other people. He claimed that Dr. Reed and Mr. Jennings had helped make
these arrangements. Yet we Americans hardly know how much to believe
was actually true and how much might be due to the excitability of this
particular man. However, on learning that the regular Tuesday morning
boat was coming in at eleven that night and leaving at three or four in the
morning, we all got our servants ready with such trunks, etc., as they could
look after and put them on the boat. When Jake came back from the first
trip to it, he said ‘Had we not better try to make it too?’ ‘While we are not
sure of this man’s report, it is evident that I am needed in Smyrna and that
war boat may not come.’ Surely God was guiding his thoughts. It was one
o’clock; the boat was to sail at four. Our house was furnished with our
own things which must be packed and there was a lot of YMCA camp
material still to be put into the store room which would not be open till
morning. But we went to work to get off with our servants and our
Secretary, Coronopoulos, at least all our goods we could. At two-thirty,
when Jake started again to the steamer, I said ‘if you can persuade the boat
to wait until five we can all make it.’ It promised to do so. The YMCA
material and key to the store house was left with a reliable man to be put
away in the morning. At four-forty the Birge family and ours – the last of
the Americans in Phocia – got on the steamer just as it was pulling up
anchor.
Tuesday, September 5th. We reached Smyrna about nine o’clock. The city
was in panic. Foreign war boats were in the harbor – British, French and
Italian. Refugees had been pouring in for two days. The streets were full of
carts, wagons, vehicles all kinds that could carry anything – all loaded
with goods the fleeing families were trying to get to steamers. The quay
was so packed with the baggage and people that our boatmen searched
some time to find a place wide enough to let us pass out single file. By
more good luck and a fancy price Jake and Birge found two Arabs to take
our stuff to our homes. Needless to say, there were no pass-port
formalities.
On reaching the Y building about ten-thirty, Jake found already in session
an American Committee organizing for relief. If I understand correctly, Mr.
Jennings was instrumental in getting this started, but the whole American
colony was co-operating. At the organization that day, Professor Lawrence
became Chairman and sub-committees were formed. Jake naturally
remained in the city with Mr. Jennings in this work all day. The YMCA
building was chosen as headquarters for the Relief Work. Mr. Fisher, who
was on vacation in Constantinople, was telegraphed for.
Philip and I went out to Paradise on the 12.30 train. On the way we met
one refugee train coming in. Two others passed our home in the afternoon.
I found a big ‘kazan’ and half a dozen Standard Oil tins of water inside my
gate. The college boys, under one of the tutors – Mr. Moremon – had
organized a ‘water brigade’ to relieve the thirst of the hot refugees as the
trains stopped at our station. Five to seven trains had passed our home
each day since Sunday. Mrs. Caldwell counted fifty-four cars on one train.
All were about the same length. The box cars were filled with goods and
the refugees sitting, or hanging, on top, wherever there was an inch of
space. The cattle cars were packed with people. Jake said the other
railway was bringing in refugees in the same manner. Along the Boudjah-
Smyrna road I saw all day a steady stream of arabas laden with goods or
people, moving towards Smyrna. Shepherds driving their flocks or cattle
toward Smyrna kept passing constantly. Among all the refugees were
goodly numbers of soldiers, so we realized that the troops were indeed
fleeing. The city began to fill up with soldiers.
Wednesday, September 6th. This condition continued much the same all
Wednesday forenoon, but in the afternoon there were fewer trains and less
traffic in every way. People seemed easier and more hopeful. Some native
families that had planned to leave came back to their homes – among them
two of the college families.
The Relief Work took more definite form. Professor Lawrence asked Jake
to serve with him as Associate Director and together they got in touch with
all the authorities to see what was most needed and where they could best
help. It was evident that the Greek High Commission was to leave in a few
days at most. The High Commission rented to Professor Lawrence and
Jake for ‘a sum that seemed just to both parties’ (which was in reality five
liras handed over by Jake) the Greek Orphanage at Boudjah, and left with
the American Consulate twenty thousand pounds for its maintenance. Mr.
Moreman of the International College was made Director, went there at
once to live and hoisted the American flag. The orphans and equipment
from places in the city were transferred to this orphanage. There were
already over two hundred and fifty there. The next day the International
College received this from Professor Lawrence and Jake assumed
responsibility for the work. Other orphanages in the city were taken over
in a similar manner. The Greek Military Authorities also turned over any
cantonments that could be used for refugees. It was not possible, however,
to fly the American flag over any of these, as they would lawfully be
considered military spoils by the Turks. Mr. Jennings was in charge of the
Committee on supplies and was taking measures to ensure a bread supply,
by arranging for flour, fuel and ovens. Mr. Yantes of the Tobacco Co. was
in charge of a transportation Committee and Mr. Griswold, another
business man, of another Committee which I cannot for the moment recall.
Professor Caldwell, assisted by Mr. Hulse of the Standard Oil, was
Treasurer. So you see how the American Community as a whole was back
of this Relief Work.
Thursday, September 7th. Throughout Thursday the situation remained
much the same as to refugees and general feeling, but towards evening
there was greater tension and anxiety again. They began marching the army
out of the city for embarkation at Cesme. The troops came for the most part
up the main Smyrna-Boudjah Road, crossing the fields just before the
Birge’s house and striking to the road past the aqueducts. Some, however,
came to the main turn and down past the station and our house. We were all
naturally anxious over the interim between the leaving of one army and the
arriving of the other. We feared the brigands.
Thursday, about midnight, a special train was sent to Boudjah with orders
to bring to the city all British subjects. The next morning the village was
naturally panic stricken.
It was this day – or else Friday morning – (one day has been so like the
other for ten days it is hard to recollect exactly) that an American
Destroyer from Constantinople arrived, bringing Mr. Fisher, and also a
Relief party from there – Captain Hepburn, personally representing
Admiral Bristol, Major Davis of the Red Cross, Mr. Jacquith and Mr. (left
blank) of the Near East Relief, and two Red Cross nurses. Finding the
Americans already organized they showed a splendid spirit in fitting into
what was started. The local Committee ‘remained in being’ for the present,
but for working purposes revamped itself into a larger form. Major Davis
was asked to be Chairman, with several Departments under him – Relief,
Transportation, etc. Just how the responsibilities were placed, I cannot
say, as I saw very little of Jake from this on. I know that every American
was ‘on the job’ to his or her full strength. The British, asked by the Greek
Government to give relief, felt free by that request to join in and were also
helping. Funds had been solicited by our Committee from the very first,
and the request was answered by a hearty response from all sources.
Trains now began to be very irregular. You know our transportation
problem at best. Our own car in town and the College car at Paradise had
been of inestimable help from Tuesday on. At this time two other cars
were secured by the Relief Committee and all were in constant use. The
going from place to place to investigate conditions and needs, the calling
upon different officials for permissions and requests for help, etc., etc.,
were made possible only by the cars.
Friday, September 8th. Friday the Greek officials were loaded on the
Greek battleships in the harbor and all the Greek boats steamed out of the
harbor in the evening. In the afternoon Jake called at the High Commission
on business, secured entrance by a back door, but found the building
absolutely empty. The Greek Army was still leaving the city.
Three American Destroyers were now in the harbor, as well as other boats
of other nationalities. American sailors, thoroughly armed were placed on
guard at all American property where requested. We all ‘requested’. From
ten to twenty were placed at the ACI and the YWCA in town and at the
International College at Paradise. Four were at the YMCA, and others at
the Standard Oil Co. and elsewhere. The Consulate naturally had a strong
guard. And I want to say right here that throughout the whole time we have
all had reason to be very proud of our sailor boys. For courage, bravery
and unselfish service they cannot be outdone. They have, without
exception, proven that in time of crisis our American sailors are ‘right
there’. Of our Paradise group at this time two were stationed at the Birge
home, one at ours, and the rest about the College gates and camps. With a
mop stick for a flag pole, I, for the first time, hoisted my American flag
from the balcony window, and later a second one from the rear window.
All this day refugees had been frantically fleeing again toward the city.
More than on any previous day were all byways crowded with arabas,
flocks, herds, people in carts and on foot, all pushing toward the city. It
was estimated that over a hundred thousand were already in the city.
People began seeking refuge in the College grounds. My servants’ families
begged and received refuge in my home – twelve in all. Neighbors kept
bringing boxes to the College and also to me for safety. We accepted what
came. At night Jake reported a comparatively quiet city, but great anxiety.
At Paradise sniping for loot had gone on more or less all day. Turkish
Orotan brigands were in the hills near us and were doing most of the
shooting. Yet Friday night we all slept in our own homes. In the night we
were wakened by a great noise of calling and shouting back and forth. It
proved to be only a company of Greek soldiers preparing for an hour’s
rest outside our gate and in the empty lots about. All were gone by morning
and no harm done. We had feared the retreating, demoralized army, as well
as the brigands and the arriving Turkish army. But the Greeks were too
frightened and too hurried, in our part of the country, at least to cause any
disturbance.
Saturday, September 9th. Saturday morning Greek troops continued to
march by our home. Refugees continued fleeing towards the city. About
eleven o’clock came the word that the Turks were in the city – ‘a peaceful
occupation’. The straggling groups of Greek soldiers still coming along,
and the refugees bound for Smyrna were petrified. All were throwing their
guns or begging people to take them. For a time, according to instructions,
and following the example of the College, I received the guns handed to
me, first letting our sailor guard make sure they were unloaded. One had
been thrown to us loaded with four bullets and cocked!! But after a time it
was evident that this policy was impossible. Too many were coming, and
our officer commanded that fire-arms must no longer be thrown on
American property. He came in person and assisted in throwing over the
fence what was being thrown in. For some moments, however, it came in
faster than could be thrown out. But order soon reigned again, and the
station master granted permission for guns to be thrown into an empty
freight car standing on the switch outside our gate. There were at least a
hundred guns in a few minutes. A train was expected up every minute
bearing Turkish soldiers – hence the great panic to get guns out of sight.
For a time a group of refugees almost stampeded our gate, so determined
were they to get in under the American flag, but I had taken all our officer
would allow, and there were so many more than I could possibly help.
Finally they camped down in the open space between our house and the
station and around the outside of our fence. The College had accepted all
that was allowed at that time. Fleeing Greek soldiers knowing that they
would be shot on sight of their uniform were frantic. I threw out all of
Jake’s old clothes for civilian attire. After the first train had passed with a
few Turkish soldiers inside, things quieted down. Our sailor quietly
walked about our premises to make sure that everything was all right. He
picked up five or six hand grenades and a few other things that were more
or less dangerous that had been dropped by the frantic people.
Sniping and looting by the Cretan brigands continued worse than the day
before. Several refugees seeking shelter outside of the College walls near
the Harlow House were killed. Our sailors said that they had good aim.
They would pick off men here and there about the walls, but carefully
avoid the spots where the sailors stood, although once or twice a shot
whizzed through the trees just over the sailors’ heads. Once one whizzed
over our vineyard and sent our refugees scurrying into the house. People
from the College could see houses in the village across being looted. So
far, the American flag had been respected. But the Birge family, being so
far from the rest of us and being so exposed, moved into the College
building, and consequently the American guard was withdrawn from there.
Our house, being such a fortress in itself, so near the College, and on such
a strategic corner for keeping track of what was going on, our officer
preferred to have us stay in our house, so that he could keep a guard there.
We preferred to stay.
Jake and Mr. Jennings came out about dusk. Fisher was spending the nights
at the Y since his arrival. Jake said they saw forty or fifty dead bodies on
their way out, but the killing this day seemed to be mostly for loot. It was
the boys and shepherds with their flocks about the city or the poor refugees
caught with their goods on the way to Smyrna who had suffered.
Jake, with Major Davis, Mr. Jacquith and others, had been to see the
Turkish Commander who was temporarily in charge to put the situation
before him and got permission for Relief work. “Wait until tomorrow” was
the general attitude, and our workers were rather discouraged. That night
we all went to bed anxious for the morrow ‘hoping against hope’ that the
promise of the Turkish officials, that all would be quiet as soon as the
regular troops arrived might prove true.
Mustafa Kemal was at all times well informed about the operations of his
troops, and often even minor decisions had to be made by him. So the Turkish
Commander could have been requesting permission. The Americans at the
time would not have known how Mustafa Kemal controlled his troops.
That night I sheltered thirty-six refugees. We fed such as we had little food.
The story of these thirty-six would give a side-light on the suffering of all
the refugees, but I fear there is neither space nor time to tell that now. We
had all opened our homes to the limit to refugees – making sure of only one
thing, that none had fire arms of any kind. The American Collegiate
Institute (ACI) had over twelve hundred, the YWCA nearly two hundred,
the YMCA ninety, (their small available space made it necessary to limit
their refuge to members only), the International College over a thousand.
Looting and shooting was bad all night.
Sunday, September 10th. I was out in the yard at six-thirty Sunday morning
giving coffee to our sailor guard, when we saw the regular Turkish Infantry
marching towards Smyrna on the Boudjah-Smyrna Road. Cavalry troops
had been passing our house more or less all night. We watched the infantry
at the corner we saw groups of five or six drop out of line, break into all
the houses on the corner, come out laden with all they could carry and drop
back into the marching column. My heart sank. We had been promised
order ‘when the Regulars came’. This was the ‘order’,–the Regular troops
with their officers. One officer told the chief or our sailor guard that the
troops had orders to gather supplies for the hospitals as they came along!!
‘Of course, they may disturb some other things as well, but this is war’
was the officer’s excuse. The Turkish guards placed at our corner this day
robbed our little old grocer, as he passed them to slip into his house for
some clothes. They also demanded fifteen pounds ‘baksheesh’ from some
poor refugees who came with College carts to get their belongings left
outside our gate. Fortunately, friends interceded and prevented this
robbery. The looting and killing increased throughout the day. Jake saw
wagons backed up to the big shops being filled by looters. Regulars and
irregulars and civilians were all having a full share in it all. One of the
worst quarters was in the immediate vicinity of General Military
Headquarters. They seemed to ‘have it in for’ the Armenians especially.
We could not learn why. No attention was paid to any flag. The Birge
house was broken into and considerable carried off, while three American
flags wave on the premises, but the looters ran on sight of the American
sailor galloping up. What could not be carried off, in most homes, was
knocked to pieces and left. Birge’s piano and heavy furniture met this
fate.” Mustafa Kemal, still with the Ottoman soldier temperament, looked
on this as “pay back in war.” This is the price the Greeks and Armenians
will have to pay for their past behavior. He knew of this misbehavior and
was content to let it continue.
About one o'clock we heard firing near by. At three I received word to
come at once to the College. A sailor led the way, my thirty-six refugees
and my family followed, guarded by a second sailor in the rear. The firing
proved to be a battle between some Greek troops in the valley trying to
make the embarkation point and Turks on Mt. Pagus. The College was just
in the midst, and fearing bad results from a stray or miscalculated shot, our
officer called all families into the main college building. For two hours we
watched the battle, the firing passing over our heads. Then all was quiet.
We could not tell whether the Greeks had been taken prisoner or escaped. I
left my refugees at the College, but our family and servants returned to our
home for supper and the night, again feeling that "tomorrow will be
better". But throughout the night we heard frequent shooting and pathetic
screaming of women out the Boudjah way. In the morning it was reported
that the poorer section of Boudjah had been looted, many killed and girls
carried off. This was the region where my servants’ fathers and brothers
had stayed by their homes. We have been able to get no word about them
yet. During this day and the next we could see villages all about being
burned.
Monday, September 11th. Monday was passing comparatively quietly,
though I kept my suitcase packed in case of a hurried call to College or to
town. Suddenly, about five o’clock, one of the College boys came with a
note from our officer telling me to come at once by the shortest path. We
grabbed our suitcases and went. Everyone at the College was nervous and
excited. Dr. MacLachlan had seen looters in the Settlement House, and
feeling confident that if he could talk with them and explain that it was
American property that they would leave it alone, he had persuaded our
officer and seven of his sailors all armed to go with him in the College car
to the scene. He began to explain to the looters. They turned on him, took
his watch and money, stripped him and beat him and would have shot him
had not a Turkish student, who had gone with him, thrown himself in front
of the gun and persuaded the men not to shoot. The American officer seeing
the situation hopeless – looters, heavily armed, far outnumbered the
Americans – sent his men back and remained alone with Dr. MacLachlan.
He also was striped, his gun, watch and money taken, and himself beaten
badly. The whole group were covered by the guns of the band, and the
feeling was strong, even on the part of our calm, level-headed officer, that
all would have been killed had not a young Turkish officer almost
miraculously appeared on the scene. He unarmed and with only a riding
whip, ordered the men away and they obeyed. It is only one of the many
instances that made us realize that the officers did not care to stop the
awful things that were happening. Dr. MacLachlan has been in bed since,
but is recovering.
Tuesday, September 12th. That night – Monday – was the most trying. Ever
since Saturday a reliable Turkish guard had been repeatedly promised, but
did not come. This night, realizing that the American flag, American
property and American life meant nothing to these people, all the
American families slept together in the upper dormitory of the College.
They were anxious hours. In the night a ‘Turkish Guard’ of about twenty
men rode into the Campus – the wildest, fiercest looking Turks I have ever
seen, dressed not in uniform but quite evidently in clothes robbed as they
came along. We are all confident they were nothing more than brigands.
They were housed in the Gymnasium until morning and our sailors quietly
kept guard over the ‘guards’. But these were our ‘protection’ until Tuesday
noon, when after repeated insistence an officer appeared. While the officer
was on the place all looting about the community ceased, but five minutes
after he left with Dr. Reed to report to his Commander in Smyrna, we
could see a steady stream of looters going into the houses – including the
Birge’s – all about, loading their backs, their animals, their wagons, and
going up the hill toward the Turkish quarter of the city. When the officer
returned all was quiet again. About five o’clock the officer received his
promised 120 men in regular uniform and stationed them about the
community as guards. The four at our corner demanded coffee and ‘raki’ of
me first thing. Fortunately I had the first, if not the latter. They may have
been all right, but I felt safer when our officer said our sailor might guard
inside instead of outside our house that night. I did not like to trust our
sailor to four of these fellows. However, everything seemed to quiet down
and we all had a fair night’s sleep in our own house. This had been a long
day for Jake. He and Birge left the College at five-thirty to report to the
military authorities the Paradise incident regarding Dr. MacLachlan and to
insist on an officer and guard. He had spent the day in the city, returning
with Jennings at dusk. All the Relief workers were getting more and more
discouraged and pessimistic, as the Turkish officials continued to put off,
or turn aside, or promise and not do. Our workers did what they could in
places like the Colleges, Orphanages, the YMCA, the YWCA etc. But it
was evident that work would be hampered as much as possible by the
authorities. One man, however, the Governor of the city, seemed really
anxious to cooperate. The Military Commander, Noureddin, on the other
hand did not even return the salute of Capt. Hepburn.
Wednesday, September 13th. To us, at Paradise, Wednesday seemed fairly
quiet and secure with our apparently friendly Turkish officer in charge, so
we were somewhat surprised when Prof. Lawrence and Mr. Jennings
brought word at noon for all women and children to be ready by three
o’clock to be taken to town and put on an American Destroyer. Several of
us were loathe to obey. The first order was that only Americans could go
and they only with hand baggage. Later, the Captain of one of our boats
came and said, while permission could not be given if asked, he thought if
we asked no questions we could get on all we took with us belonged in our
house holds. Such was the case. All our servants and all school boys and
girls that we took into our families went on with us without question. Some
Greek families of the College were accepted without question.
Jake and our sailor chauffeur on the ride to the city kept indicating when
we must look down and close our eyes. I could not always obey. I saw the
chauffeur swerve the car to avoid bumping over one dead man in the
middle of the road. The awful stench told the story the rest of the time.
There evidently had been no burying parties since Saturday. We were
gathered at the Smyrna Theater, the headquarters for Americans, and sent
off by tens in the little motors of the Destroyer. Birge, Jake and Jennings
had come to the Theater to help the families off. We waved them good-bye,
reached the destroyer and turned to see fires blazing up in four places.
They were started in the Armenian quarter, near the Turkish quarter with a
strong wind blowing away from the Turkish quarter. We steamed out the
fire had become one mass, a mile or more long, and the picture described
at the beginning imprinted itself forever on our minds.
Smyrna Burning, 14 Americans Missing
George Horton was the U.S. Consul and senior diplomat of the United
States in Smyrna. He was married to a Greek woman and loved Greece. He
was well connected, but failed to use the prestige and position of the United
States to intercede between the Turkish Nationalists and Greeks, or to
provide food, shelter, medical care or protection for the helpless Greeks,
Armenians and Jews. He abrogated his responsibility as a diplomat like the
other diplomats in Smyrna. He boarded a U.S. destroyer this date, and sailed
off to safety leaving behind Vice Consul Maynard Barnes and members of the
Consul staff. The staff, like the volunteer relief workers from the American
community, all risked their lives and stayed on the job until the rescue was
completed, but George Horton ran. He was a coward. When he got to Athens
he tried to convince the world that he was the savior of the Greeks, and his
daughter has continued with that propaganda for the next 90 years.
This date, the 13th, is significant for other reasons. Asa Jennings had
arrived in Turkey on August 16. August 19th, his boss, Jake, left for two
weeks of vacation. That meant Asa was in charge of the Y. The very next day,
the 20th of August, the Greek line broke and the crisis started. By the 9th of
September, the Turkish Army was in Smyrna. All during this period up to
September 13th, George Horton did nothing on behalf of the Greeks and
Armenians, but he was the person who should have acted. When he left
Smyrna on the 13th, then Asa was free of any suggestion that he should work
through diplomatic officers. The diplomats had not approached the Turkish
leaders, and the situation was getting worse. The fire was the turning point.
Asa later wrote that he was overcome on September 20th, his birthday, with
an uncontrollable desire to get ships. That is when he went to see the Turkish
leader, Mustafa Kemal, who people feared, in order to get an agreement to
get ships. This is the same Asa K. Jennings who told his wife back in 1906
that he cannot die like the doctors said he would, because he had a great
mission to accomplish.
Eyewitness Story of Smyrna’s Horror
Continuing with the letter from Sarah Jacob to D.A. Davis of the
International YMCA:
Thursday, September 14th. We are in Athens, hourly awaiting further news.
I can see no possible hope that any building in all the main part of the city
can be saved. God grant that something may protect the people until rescue
can reach them.
I have written in this diary-like form, trying to picture the rising tension as
it came to us. I have told only what we experienced and saw as I had not
exact facts of the other scenes, but I do know others in the city saw far
worse scenes than I did. Miss Mills at the ACI was in the thickest of it.
She tells of the massacring and torturing that went on in the Armenian
section, of the men shot down and chopped to pieces under the American
flags of the College, of the terror when the ACI was burning and the doors
had to be opened and the refugees told to flee to the quay and of the
shooting that began immediately. She tried to keep her few girls and
teachers together, but it was impossible in the throngs, and each had to go
as best she could. Miss Mills knew not whether they reached safety or not.
It was impossible to find out. And so goes story after story of every one,
these terrible ten days. But the Americans, each where duty called, have
stood by the Relief work night and day and have done all that was in their
power to do.
We have all experienced as never before the trusting of our dear ones to
God, and praying – yes, that they may be safe – but still more that they –
and we – may be given wisdom to know our duty and courage to do it at
any cost.
Sincerely yours,
Signed – Sarah C. Jacob.
P.S. Monday, September 18th. Several other boats from Smyrna have now
arrived. Miss Christie of the YWCA was aboard one of the boats. She
reports that all the teachers and all but two of the Orphanage students of
the ACI are saved on her boat; also all the YWCA staff girls except one.
Mr. Birge helped many of these to get aboard. She saw Jake on the shore,
throwing people into the little boats. All the American boats in the harbor
were taking on refugees, also some British boats. Italian and French boats
were taking on only their own subjects. However, the Italian boat arriving
last night brought refugees of all nationalities.
Our Paradise Doctor, Dr. Lerando, came with us, but his brother, passing
as an Italian, arrived on the Italian boat on Friday. He estimates that
200,000 people were still on the quay. No more Paradise people have yet
arrived and no definite word has been received from them. Several report,
Miss Christie among others, how people were throwing themselves into
the sea and trying to swim to boats. Some were taken up by the boat hooks;
some found naked were rolled in blankets as soon as received.
One of the wealthy men of Smyrna, away on business in Dantzic, hurried
home on a telegraphic message from his family, found the city burning and
was brought to Athens, frantic about his mother and sister. The sister had
been seen, captured by the Turks and being carried to the mountains.
Yesterday he found her on one of the refugee boats; she had escaped the
Turks, threw herself into the sea, and was pulled, naked, into the boat. We
have supplied her with clothes. This is a story of many similar cases.
We are organizing relief at this place and constantly awaiting news from
Smyrna. The city is reported to be burnt from the Customs House to the
point, including the Government buildings. Of course, the YMCA and
YWCA are gone. S.C.J.
From the letters and records of Amy W. Jennings, wife of Asa K. Jennings:
A price had been set by the Sultan upon the head of Kemal as the leader of
this Turkish revolution; therefore, his followers were struggling not only
for the independence of Turkey but for their very lives.
In August 1922 the news reached Mr. Jennings and other Americans in
Smyrna that the Turkish Nationalists had broken through the Greek lines
and were forcing the Greek Army to the sea, and that the Greek soldiers in
their disastrous retreat were burning villages and cities behind them and
compelling the Christian population of Greeks and Armenians to flee with
them. These hordes of soldiers and refugees passed Mr. Jennings’ home, as
the American College was in the direct line of retreat. He was a witness to
the occupation of Smyrna by the Turkish Army, and to the burning of
Smyrna, and many of the horrors and tragedies which ensued.