4. The Greek Army Enters Smyrna

THE GREEK ARMY ENTERS SMYRNA
O
n May 15, 1919 the first units of the Greek Army landed in Smyrna,
Turkey. The Allied Powers authorized the occupation and creation of the
Zone of Smyrna during negotiations regarding the partition of the Ottoman
Empire to protect the ethnic Greek population living in and around the city
The Treaty of Sevres dated August 10, 1920, which was more than a year
after the Greek Army had landed in Smyrna, placed the city of Smyrna and
territory around the city as defined in Article 66 under the control of the
Greeks. J.C. Hurewitz, Diplomacy in the Near and Middle East, Volume II,
(Princeton, New Jersey: D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., 1956)
What gave the Allied Powers this authority? The answer begins with the
definition of sovereignty. Sovereignty is “the power to govern; supreme
political authority. That public authority which commands in civil society,
and orders and directs what each citizen is to perform to obtain the end of its
institution.” James A. Ballentine, Ballentine’s Law Dictionary, Third
Edition, (Rochester, New York: The Lawyers Co-operative Publishing
Company, 1969) p. 1196
Also according to Ballentine, a sovereign state is defined as “a people
permanently occupying a fixed territory, bound together by common laws,
habits, and customs into one body politic, exercising through the medium of
an organized government, independent sovereignty and control over all
persons and things within its boundaries, capable of making war and peace,
and of entering into international relations with other communities.” p. 1196
By 1919 the Sultan had become so weak that he was unable to exercise
sovereign authority over the Turkish people. He had agreed to be an ally of
Germany in World War One as one of the Central Powers, but Turkey was not
the Ottoman power of old. He no longer had command and control over the
institutions of government and people of Turkey. One of those institutions in
most countries is the police. Ottoman Turkey had an army, but there were not
police departments in each town and village. The National Police Academy
was not founded until 1937. Differences between people were settled
privately.
“It has been estimated that about 20 per cent of the population of Anatolia
died violently during the last ten years (1912-1922) of the Ottoman empire’s
existence; some 2.5 million Muslims, up to 800,000 Armenians and 300,000
Greeks.” Bruce Clark, Twice a Stranger, (Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Harvard University Press, 2006) p. 13.
People were killing each other between 1912 and 1922 for their own
reasons, and there was no police force or government institution to stop the
violence. This was not a genocide as claimed by the Armenians, for their
own purposes, but rather an absence of civil order. More Muslims died than
Armenians and Greeks combined. The 300,000 were Turkish citizens of
Greek ancestry. Most had no connection to Greece, except their religion and
cultural customs, and some did not speak Greek.
There was no sovereign authority controlling most of Turkey. The political
authorities of Greece decided it was the obligation of Greece to protect this
group of Turkish citizens who were ethnic Greeks. Greece would become the
policeman of the Turks.
The Central Powers lost World War One and were at the mercy of the
Allied Powers. The Sultan signed the Treaty of Sevres in theory as the
sovereign power in Turkey. In fact, he did not control Turkey. The Sultan was
so weak that he left Turkey forever on November 17, 1922. The Nationalist
Government led by Mustafa Kemal rejected the Treaty of Sevres.
However, Greece, Italy, France and Britain did not meet the tests to be the
sovereign power in Turkey either. Sovereignty rests with the power that can
defend the territory. So Greece, Italy, France and Britain staked their claims
in Turkey. The U.S., which was one of the Allied Powers, did not make any
claim to acquire Turkish territory. In fact, during World War One when the
U.S. technically was at war with the Ottomans U.S. missionaries worked in
Turkey supporting the Turkish citizens. The friendly relations and reputation
of the Americans were to pay huge dividends later.
Article 66 describes the boundaries around Smyrna which were to be the
limits of Greek territory. The eastern border was the town of Salihli. That is
approximately 55 miles, or 88 kilometers, almost due east of Smyrna (Izmir
today). The Greek Army occupied Turkey well beyond the limits established
in Article 66. Any territory conquered by the Greeks would have to be
defended in order to establish sovereignty. A defense is normally based on a
natural barrier like a sea, large river or mountains. The politicians of Greece
who were excellent negotiators and diplomats, but who lacked military
experience, pressed the Greek army to expand into the interior of Turkey
without consideration of how sovereignty could be defended.
The details of Article 66 Treaty of Sevres appear as “Sevres Treaty: Part
III HR www.hri.org/docs/sevres/part3.htm.”
The Greek Army advance was stopped in 1921 at the Sakarya River near
Polatli. That is 50 miles from the capital of the Nationalist Government of
Turkey, and 277 miles from Smyrna (Izmir). The Greeks had far exceeded the
limits to their expansion that they and the Allies had agreed upon. There was
no authorization by any government for this intrusion into Turkey. More
important than the legal issue was the intrusion proved Mustafa Kemal was
correct when he pronounced in June 1919 that the independence of Turkey
was in danger. The Greeks were creating a supreme leader of the Turks.
The uneducated and unorganized poor Turkish citizens whose nationalistic
spirit had been ignited in 1919 were now on fire. Asa K. Jennings on
February 29 and March 1, 1928, wrote the “Report for Mrs. Emmons Blaine
of Work Accomplished in Smyrna, Turkey” in which he said:
A new Turkish army, under the leadership of Kemal, had brought about a
revolution, and while branded by the Sultan as an outlaw and a
revolutionary leader, upon whose head he placed a price, and had given
strict orders that if possible he should be captured and executed, Kemal
continued to gather about him increasing numbers of the Turkish people
and enlarged his army until it became so strong that they not only were
able to stop the advance of the Greek armies, which had come to a
dangerous nearness to the temporary capital at Angora (Ankara), but they
were able to hold their ground and even force a retreat.
Women and children, old men, any person who could carry a gun
volunteered for service. Resting for some time on their arms, but working
meanwhile to better prepare themselves for their final aggressive advance,
they created a wonderful esprit de corps.
The Greeks mistook their inactivity for either lack of ability to advance, or
a desire not to push their efforts. And as a result, the Greek army became
divided, for they had political differences of their own, and were not
prepared to withstand the advance of the Turkish army, reorganized and
refreshed, when at last in 1922 Kemal gave the order to advance
The Turks had been subject to military discipline for 623 years, followed
orders, and were loyal to their leaders, but they were still a pickup citizen
army of volunteers who joined the campaign as it marched forward. By
contrast, the Greek army was considered a world-class army that had been
fighting in the Balkans and Turkey for ten years. The Turks followed Mustafa
Kemal not out of obedience, but out of respect and belief in him as a leader.
They respected his word as law. To this day, all Turks hold Mustafa Kemal
Ataturk in the highest regard and most display his photograph in their
businesses. This respect for authority is part of the Turkish persona that
exists today. After the Smyrna tragedy when the mullahs were speaking up
against Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, he did not tolerate such dissension and
closed the mosques and banished the mullahs. He had witnessed the political
dissension created in Greece by the priests, and would not allow that in
Turkey. That is when he banned the fez, liberated women and made many
more social changes. The Turkish Republic was formed as a secular
government unlike other Middle Eastern countries and the influence of the
Orthodox Church in Greek politics.
Asa Jennings went on to say in his Report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine:
The partitioning out and assigning to various Powers the zones of influence
in Turkey left that country with practically nothing at all except the
hinterland, which the Turkish leaders refused to accept.
The educated Turkish people, and the real Turkish leaders felt that a great
injustice had been done them and would not submit to it. Under the
leadership of Mustapha Kemal Pasha, they went out in the spirit of ’76 to
save their land.
The spirit of ’76 is a reference to the American Revolution of 1776 when
American citizens joined together to drive the British Army out of the
American Colonies.
All the Greeks wanted when they landed in 1919 were Smyrna and the rich
hinterland. From the Report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine:
Smyrna is the metropolis of the Near East, the most important city, and the
oldest one. When the first historian wrote his first surviving record,
Smyrna was standing at the head of a deep inlet on the Aegean coast of
Asia Minor, partially protected from danger of the sea by a land-locked
harbor.
The wealth of the surrounding country has been her bane and her blessing
from the beginning. From the time men learned to paddle until they crossed
the ocean in oil burning ships, the quest of the Golden Fleece has brought
them to the shores of Asia Minor. Pirates and privateers have come by
water, and hordes of barbarians and others by land through Europe to Asia.
Smyrna has been looted and burned and partially destroyed by conquering
armies time after time in her long career. In self-protection she has fought
and bled throughout the centuries. Unlike her sister cities of old, she has
never died of her wounds. Her bones have never been picked by vultures,
nor buried by the dusts of time and finally dug up by archaeologists.
Smyrna is one of the living wonders of the world, and the wonder is that
she stayed on the surface of the earth, retaining her place, name and
commerce, at times almost reduced to a vanishing point, and then coming
back.
It will be recalled that Smyrna is the location of one of the Seven Churches
of Asia, about which John wrote. Here the apostle Paul and the Beloved
Disciple John lived and died. Polycarp, a convert of St. John, became the
first Bishop, and the Patron Saint of Smyrna; and was martyred there in
155, an old man; and his grave may be seen to this day at the head of the
ancient stadium in which he was burned at the stake.
Smyrna has been known as pagan and Christian Smyrna. It may be known
now, perhaps, as Moslem Smyrna. It has had all sorts of political control
in its day, but one thing is characteristic of the Smyrnites, that is, that they
are faithful, faithful to the government under which they find themselves
living, and to the religious belief of their fathers.
The Beloved Disciple John, when he wrote to the Seven Churches of Asia
from the island of Patmos, had this characteristic in mind concerning
Smyrna, in these words: ‘Be thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a
crown of life.’ (Revelations 1-10).
Why, then, did the Greek government have its Army go beyond the limits to
territorial expansion the Greeks had agreed to? Greece had the pearl of the
Mediterranean. Is that not beauty enough? Ego has no limit. Ego trumps logic.
Greek Admiral “Dannys” Theofanides, Grandson of the Greek hero
Captain Ioannis Theofanides, said in his home in Athens in 2013 that the
Greek military could have defended Smyrna and area immediately
surrounding Smyrna from the Turkish army. The mighty Greek navy could be
of no help when the fighting is 277 miles from Izmir, and the Greek army was
less effective with such long supply lines.
When the Greek troops entered Smyrna on May 15, 1919, the ethnic Greek
population celebrated. Greek flags were displayed. The Greek Orthodox
Metropolitan of Smyrna, Chrysostomos of Smyrna, blessed the first troops as
they arrived.
An inexperienced colonel was in charge of the operation and neither the
appointed High Commissioner nor high-ranking military individuals were
there for the landing resulting in miscommunication and a breakdown of
discipline. Most significantly, this resulted in the 1/38 Evzone Regiment
landing north of where they were to take up their post. As a result, they had to
march south passing a large part of the Greek celebratory crowds and the
Ottoman governor’s konak (official residence) and the barracks of Ottoman
troops.
Someone fired a shot and chaos resulted with the Greek troops firing
multiple shots into the konak and the barracks. The Ottoman troops
surrendered and the Greek regiment began marching them up the coast to a
ship to serve as a temporary prison. A British citizen at the scene claimed he
witnessed the shooting deaths by both Greeks in the crowd and Greek troops
of 30 unarmed surrendered prisoners during this march. British officers in the
harbor reported seeing Greek troops bayoneting multiple Turkish prisoners
during the march and then saw them thrown into the sea.
In the chaos throughout the day, looting of Turkish houses began and by the
end of the day 300 to 400 Turkish citizens had been killed, 100 Greeks were
killed, including 2 troops. Violence continued the next day and for the next
months as Greek troops took over towns and villages in the region. Atrocities
were committed by both ethnic groups, notably at the Battle of Aydin on June
27, 1919.
Aydin is located 55 miles southeast of Izmir, almost due east of Ephesus
(Kusadasi in Turkish), the last known residence of the Virgin Mary.
After its occupation of Smyrna, the Greek army had started to advance into
inner Western Anatolia from the first day of their landing at Smyrna and the
incursion had extended into the Menderes valley in the second week of the
occupation. Aydin, the central city of the region, was occupied on May 27.
The rapid advance of Greek troops into the country had increased the
agitation of the population.
The principal source on the fighting and the massacres remains the Report
of the Inter-Allied Commission of Inquiry of October 1919. The report was
prepared by four generals of the Allied powers following their on-the-spot
checks. That report included:
Throughout the Aydin region the population was armed, Turks as well as
Greeks. The Greek Command also erred in tolerating the action of armed
Greek civilians, armed by Greece since February, who, under the pretext
of assisting the Greek troops, began looting and committing all manner of
excesses.
The warfare around Aydin was started by an ambush on June 27, 1919 of a
Greek patrol by irregular Turkish forces.
In the course of reconnaissance patrols around Aydin, some of the villages
were burned down by Greek detachments. They were repulsed. On June
28, the attackers began to use 105-mm guns. Some of the fires that broke
out in the quarter of Cuma, one of Aydin’s Turkish quarters, in the morning
of June 29 started during this engagement. Other fires also broke out in this
quarter at various isolated points. A large number of Turkish men, women
and children who were trying to leave the burning quarter were killed for
no reason by the Greek soldiers, who were guarding all the exits that led
from this quarter to the northern part of the town. The report observes that
there was no doubt that the Greek Command and troops ran amok. The
Greeks evacuated the town in the night of June 29 and early hours of June
30 after having committed numerous attacks and other crimes. A large
number of Greek civilians hoping to escape by accompanying the troops as
they retreated were prevented from doing so by the Command.
A subsequent fire in the Greek quarter was started by Turkish gangs under
their leader once they took control of the city. The gangs entered the
quarter in the morning of June 30 and burnt it down after having looted the
houses, killing the occupants. Irrespective of age or sex, a number of
Greek inhabitants encountered by the gangs as they roamed through the
town were ruthlessly killed. Around 2000 or 3000 inhabitants were
robbed but not killed. They had managed to take refuge in the French
convent before the gangs arrived, after which they sought the protection of
the Commander of the small Ottoman Division present in the city.
The Greek troops, with the help of reinforcements recaptured Aydin on
July 4. The reoccupation of Aydin was ordered by the Greek High
Command in spite of the express orders of the representative of the Entente
(Allied Powers). The Greek authorities acted on orders received from
Venizelos in Paris on July 2. These orders prevented the representative of
the Entente from intervening in the matter. Once in Aydin, the Greeks set
fire to the Turkish quarter situated in the western part of the town where
there were also some Greek factories.
According to the Inter-Allied Inquiry Commission report, all the fires that
were started between June 29 and July 4 most probably had destroyed two
thirds of the city of Aydin, which had a population of 20,000, including some
8000 Greeks.
Most of the villages situated along the railway track between Balacik and
Aydin were also destroyed by fires started in the course of military
operations that took place in the region. The occupation of the vilayet of
Aydin by the Greek forces had caused significant material losses to crops
and property, some attributable to looting, theft and the destruction of
livestock. Considerable losses were also suffered due to the burning of
houses, villages and the town of Aydin.
Before the Greek army returned to Aydin, most of the Turkish population
had already left the town and surrounding area in order to take refuge in
the Italian zone or in the Nazilli-Denizli region, where they remained until
the end of the war.
On the other hand, the Greek population of the town was either massacred
by the Turks or taken to captivity in the interior of Anatolia.
This violence resulted in decreased international support for the
occupation and a rise of Turkish nationalism. The landing and reports of the
violence had a large impact on many parties. The landing helped bring
together the various groups of Turkish resistance into an organized
movement, and that was further assisted by the landing of Mustafa Kemal in
Samsun on May 19, 1919.
As a response to the claims of violence, the French Prime Minister
Clemenceau suggested an Interallied Commission of Inquiry to Smyrna. The
commission was made up of Admiral Mark Lambert Bristol for the United
States, General Bunoust for France, General Hare for England, General
Dall’olio for Italy and, as a non-voting observer, Colonel Mazarakis for
Greece. It began work in August 1919 and interviewed 175 witnesses and
visited multiple sites of alleged atrocities. The decision reached was that
when a Greek witness and Turkish witness disagreed, a European witness
would be used to provide the conclusions for the report. The report was
released to negotiators in October and generally found Greeks responsible
for the bloodshed related to the landing and the violence throughout the
Smyrna zone after the landing. In addition, the conclusions questioned the
fundamental justification for the Greek occupation and suggested Greek
troops be replaced by an allied force. In the negotiations after the report,
Clemenceau reminded Venizelos that the occupation of Smyrna was not
permanent and merely a political solution. Venizelos responded angrily and
the negotiators moved on. This report is on the internet as “Documents of the
Inter-Allied Commission of Inquiry.”
At about the same time, British Field Marshal George Milne was tasked
by the allies with devising a solution to Italian and Greek tension in the
Menderes River Valley. Milne warned in his report that Turkish guerrilla
action would continue as long as the Greeks continued to occupy Smyrna and
questioned the justification for Greek occupation. Most importantly, his
report developed a border that would separate the Smyrna zone from the rest
of Anatolia. The council of Great Britain, France, U.S. and Italy approved
the Milne line beyond which Greek troops were not to cross, except to
pursue attackers but not more than 3 km beyond the line. On July 22, 1920,
Greek military divisions crossed the Milne line around the Smyrna zone and
began military operations in the rest of Anatolia.
Aristidis Stergiadis was appointed the High Commissioner of Smyrna in
February and arrived in the city four days after the May 15 landing.
Stergiadis immediately went to work in setting up an administration, easing
ethnic violence, and making way for permanent annexation of Smyrna.
Stergiadis immediately punished the Greek soldiers responsible for violence
on May 15-16 with court martial and created a commission to decide on
payment for victims (made up of representatives from Great Britain, France,
Italy and other allies). Stergiadis took a strict stance against discrimination
of the Turkish population and opposed church leaders and the local Greek
population on a number of occasions. This stance against discrimination of
the Turkish population often pitted Stergiadis against the local Greek
population, the church and the army. He reportedly would carry a stick
through the town with which he would beat Greeks that were being abusive
to Turkish citizens. At one point, Stergiadis interrupted and ended a sermon
by the bishop Chrysostomos that he believed to be incendiary. Troops would
disobey his orders to not abuse the Turkish population often putting him in
conflict with the military.