14. Metropolitan Chrysostomos of Smyrna

One of the more sordid events of the Turkish conquest was the killing of
Greek Orthodox Metropolitan Chrysostomos of Smyrna. There was no doubt
that he had blessed the Greek troops upon their invasion of Turkey and had
urged them on at every turn. He was a vocal Greek partisan.
Smyrna came under the rule of the butcher of Smyrna, Turkish General
Noureddin Pasha. Noureddin reported to Mustafa Kemal, both Ottoman
generals, and was accountable to Mustafa Kemal. Any act by Noureddin had
to be responsive to the orders and intent of Mustafa Kemal. Kemal allowed
Noureddin and Turks to vent their wrath against the Greeks and, most
notably, their leader, the Metropolitan. The barbarian acts of those Ottoman
Turks would be abhorrent to the Turks of today. If Greeks, and the rest of the
world today, understand how the Turks have changed, then reconciliation can
begin, and that could help the Greeks.
On September 9, 1922, soon after the Turkish army had moved into
Smyrna, a Turkish officer and two soldiers took Chrysostomos from the
office of the cathedral and delivered him to the Turkish commander-in-chief,
Noureddin Pasha. The general decided to hand him over to a Turkish mob
who murdered him.
According to French soldiers who witnessed the lynching but were under
strict orders from their commanding officer not to intervene: ‘The mob took
possession of Metropolitan Chrysostomos and carried him away...a little
further on, in front of an Italian hairdresser named Ismail...they stopped and
the Metropolitan was slipped into a white hairdresser’s overall. They began
to beat him with their fists and sticks and to spit on his face. They riddled
him with stabs. They tore his beard off, they gouged his eyes out, they cut off
his nose and ears.’
Bishop Chrysostomos was then dragged (according to some sources, he
was dragged around the city by a car or truck) into a backstreet of the Iki
Cheshmeli district where he died soon after.
On September 13, 1922, the day the American families left Smyrna for the
safety of Greece my Grandmother Amy Jennings’ last image of Asa while
looking at him from the safety of an American destroyer was Asa
disappearing into a crowd of people going off to do what he could to relieve
the suffering of so many helpless people.
My Father Asa W. Jennings spoke of that day driving in the Y (YMCA)
Chevy from Paradise to the port of Smyrna. My Grandfather Asa K. Jennings
was driving and had the family members, his wife Amy and three children,
Asa W. (15), Wilbur (13) and daughter Bertha (8) laying down in the car to
avoid stray bullets as they drove though the combat. At one point, my
Grandfather encountered a Greek soldier and Turkish soldier engaged in
hand-to-hand combat in the street. The streets of Smyrna were narrow and the
car could not possibly pass around these two soldiers. So my Grandfather
leaned on the horn. The two soldiers separated, and my Grandfather passed
through. The two soldiers then continued their efforts to kill each other.
My Grandfather Asa K. Jennings spoke to a friend of that tragic day, and
the friend recorded the comments in “The Great Rescue.” The friend was
R.W. Abernethy who published these remarks as part of a larger article in a
book The Spirit of the Game. Basil Mathews, The Spirit of the Game, (New
York: George H. Doran Company, 1926)
On the ninth of September the vanguard of the Turkish army appeared, their
advance being delayed somewhat by the desultory resistance of the last
remnant of the Greek forces. Just outside Smyrna, on the heights that are
known as Paradise, occurred the last engagement between the two armies.
Now our home was on those slopes, and though I was in the city at the time
my family witnessed the whole affair. When I got home that night my two
boys rushed up to me shouting, ‘Gee, Dad, you ought to have been here.
You could see them shooting and falling everywhere!’ They had, you see,
the typical enthusiasm of youth for war and its glamour. About 10,000
Greeks were captured in this affair before the army gave way and made for
the ships.
On the heels of the fleeing Greeks came the victorious Turks – and they
were indeed a victorious army. Olive branches were seen on every hand,
the saddles of the horses and donkeys were gaily decorated, and the joy of
the Turks of Smyrna knew no bounds at seeing their deliverers at last.
It must be set down to their credit that despite the fact that they were
inflamed with rage at the devastation in the wake of the retreating Greek
army, at the ravaging and pillaging that are the concomitants of war, and
especially war here in the Near East where it is practiced not altogether in
accordance with the Marquis of Queensberry rules, despite this special
and intense hatred for the Greeks, the Turkish army entered the city in a
very orderly fashion. Coincident with their entrance, handbills were
circulated proclaiming that Kemal had given orders that no Christians
were to be molested....These (handbills) were dated from Paris.
But all the official orders in the world could not have staved off friction
between the Turkish soldiers and the Greeks and Armenians of Smyrna.
After what these soldiers had witnessed of Greek depredations upon
Turkish cities and Turkish subjects, anything Greek was like a red rag to a
bull. As you know what the centuries-old attitude of the Turk towards the
Armenian has been. As a consequence, it wasn’t long before skirmishes
broke out, and during these it was rather risky to be on the streets.
I remember the exciting time I had on the morning of September 13th when
I was on my way to the office. I was coming through the Armenian quarter,
and as ill luck would have it, fell in with a mob. There was firing on both
sides, for of course Turkish soldiers were everywhere. I had long since
taken the precautionary measure of arming myself with an American flag,
for that little bit of bunting was of more potential defense than any Colt
automatic. Finding myself in this pleasant little party, I pulled out my flag,
pinned it on, and made for the nearest wall. I finally reached it and then
walked sideways for quite a distance, for I had always been told that if
you must be shot by all means avoid being shot in the back
Lots of those people didn’t know an American flag from a towel. I had not
been in the Near East long, but I had been there long enough to know that
that part of the world does not consider a towel indispensable. Next to the
Golden Rule it is the most neglected attribute of civilization.
I finally got down to the office and hadn’t been there long before one of
our Armenian secretaries came to me in a paroxysm of terror. He had
known for days what fate probably awaited all Armenians in the city if the
Turks ever got control. He had been terribly upset mentally, debating
whether to remain at his post and care for his compatriots as best he could,
or try to escape before the Turks entered.
“The Turks are here, Mr. Jennings; right here in the city, and you know
what may happen any moment. I have been told to pray about it. What shall
I do? Shall I stay on here, or try to get away while there may yet be a
chance?”
I looked at the young fellow and felt a tug at my heart for he was a fine lad
and I had grown to like him. I stood up, put my hands on his shoulders, and
said, ‘My boy, I’d pray about it; yes, I’d pray – but I’d do more than that.
I’d use my legs’
His face lit up in a benediction of hope and relief as he thanked me and
sped off. Fortunately, by the use of both agencies, prayer and his legs, he
got away safely!
Later that morning we were notified that the navy had issued orders that all
Americans were to leave. But one hour was given in which to make the
necessary preparations. I immediately went back home, told my wife and
boys of the order, and hastily gathering together a few necessities we made
for the quay. I can still see that dinner sitting on the stove. There came
times the next few days when I was so famished that, like Esau, I would
have sold my birthright for that ‘mess of pottage’ we abandoned that
morning.
Leaving my family with the other Americans temporarily housed in the
theater, I returned to the office only to find Garhadian, our Armenian Boys’
Secretary, in an agony of fear and dread. He knew well enough what
awaited the Armenian population of Smyrna if the Turkish soldiers got out
of control of their officers. Garhadian rushed up to me, begging me to find
some way of saving him. Now in the orders to the Americans it had been
stated that one personal servant would be allowed to accompany each
family. The Jennings family did not possess the luxury of a domestic, so my
mind was quickly made up. I told him of the order, ending up by saying,
‘You are to be my servant for today.’
With my family safely away, I turned to help care for the thousands of
refugees who had come into the city. Perhaps we might have found some
way of handling them if the fire had not come, I don’t know. There is not
much use dwelling on that, for the fire did come, how, no one seems to
have any clear knowledge. It is known, though, that a group of Armenians
had formed a club whose purpose was to bomb some of the principal
Turkish buildings then housing officers. In some way these young
conspirators were apprehended, and the discovery of the plot naturally
infuriated the Turks, who determined upon revenge. The fire began in the
Armenian quarter. Of that there can be little doubt. Almost simultaneously
it broke out in other sections, until within a short time the whole quarter
was a mass of flames. The people had no place to go save to the quay, and
there they flocked by the thousands, with the fire behind them and water in
front of them, through neither of which they could pass.
It was then that the situation became more than desperate.
As spoken by Asa K. Jennings
In the rush to leave Turkey, Asa W. Jennings (15) chose to take a hand
written Koran that he had purchased in the market. The author has that Koran
now which is an extraordinary document of painstaking dedication and
artistic work. Asa W. accompanied his Mother Amy, brother Wilbur and
sister Bertha to Greece. The family went on to Geneva and then to the U.S.,
except once the family was safely in Piraeus, Asa W., age only 15, returned
to Smyrna, and the risk of being killed at any minute, to help his weak and ill
Father. The two had a great bond and love for each other.
Sarah Jacob’s husband Jake wrote a report on September 18, 1922, to the
International Y, excerpts from which are quoted below:
Sept. 3 Rumors of lost position by Greeks. Greeks outside of Philadelphia
(Alashehir).
Sept. 4 Greeks rout confirmed but sounds so exaggerated that it is hard to
believe; however return from Phocia.” Phocia is Foca, Turkey, today
located in the Izmir Province about 43 miles (69 km) north from Izmir’s
city center.
Sept. 5 Situation terribly confused. Greeks of wealth flee leaving poor and
leaderless behind. American relief committee formed.
Sept. 6 No news. Refugees pouring in 30,000 daily, relief began in
churches and court yards.
Sept. 7 Orphanages turned over to relief. Greek authorities take pitiable
view of situation and of their responsibility; informed that authorities will
retire on Friday.
Sept. 8 Greek officials and ships leave at 6:30 p.m. Smyrna without a
government. Cavalry coming through Paradise.” Paradise is southeast of
the center of Smyrna (Izmir). It is 3.5 miles (5.6 km) from Izmir to
Paradise (Sirinyer, Turkey today)
Sept. 9 Greek troops in great masses pass thru Paradise en route for
Tschesme (Cesme). 11 a.m. Turkish cavalry enters Smyrna and by splendid
conduct calms people. Good order till afternoon. Then looting and killing
in St. Georges Church. Rumors of trouble all along coast. Twenty dead
along Paradise road by night. All American institutions full of refugees.
Sept. 10 Sniping and looting all day, especially in St. Constanten and St.
Vauclo quarter. French began to evacuate their people. Thousands of
refugees on lighter. Turks high low, take very arrogant attitude.
Sept. 11 Armenian quarter most severely treated. Relief administered in
numerous Greek churches housing 20,000 or more refugees. President of
International College and chief petty officer attached narrowly escaped
being killed. All Americans moved to college ground with 1000 refugees.
Great anxiety with irregulars arrival.
Sept. 12 Armenian quarter 4/5 looted, with dead on streets and in houses.
Sept. 13 American consulate and naval commander orders American
women to embark for Piraeus (Greece) with American Consul General
Horton. 1 p.m. Fire started in Armenian section with strong wind blowing
toward Christian section. At American Collegiate Institution Firefighters
threatened with shooting by Turkish guards put there for protection.
Reliable American saw 2 soldiers putting kerosene on streets. Most fires
start from rear or inside the buildings.
Sept 14 Fire continued, YMCA destroyed with Armenian, Greek and
European sections, business retail wholesale sections burned up.
Robberies and murders on quay in front of all allied ships. Sending out
refugees as best we can. 700 on destroyer, 1800 on cargo boat, some
French, Italian and British ships take on other, in all about 20,000 have
escaped thus far.
Sept 15 Turkish control tightens along quay...Refugees are being
exiled...All ships available for refugees have left harbor, no others seem to
be coming.
Sincerely,
(signed) E. O. Jacob
Excerpts from “My Smyrna Disaster Diary – Part Two” by E.O. Jacob
Sept. 16 The American navy again takes a hand in the refugee situation by
taking on the Armenian boys’ orphanage, the cooperation of the Turkish
guards being obtained by periodical palm-greasing and by a generous
display of American blue jackets.
Sept. 17 A light in the darkness of heartlessness; the Aydin Brewery! I
found today that they have taken in a Greek orphanage of 85 boys who they
are feeding and housing. They also have between five and ten thousand
refugees in their beer garden. They are using up their own slender supply
of food in a soup-kitchen for the poor. The whole staff has become a
refugee organization. But they want bread, and we have not been able to
get any bakeries started since the fire.
Sept. 18 This morning we found the whole military government changed
without notice. Governor, staff, liaison officers, guards, all had vanished.
The new crowd has never heard of us so we had to start all over again
cultivating relations with the authorities. The Americans have again taken
the bull by the horns!
From the military bakeries comes direct and detailed testimony of what
has been reported from many other places...the Turkish guards took five
girls from among the refugees, stripped them, made them dance, violated
and then killed them.
Sept 19 The worst sight I have seen thus far are the 8250 old men, women
and children in the military barracks at Baldjova; there is almost no water,
and they have had no food for five days. We gave them over thirty sacks of
flour, promised bread for tomorrow, and arranged to repair the pumps. It
seems almost impossible to estimate how many refugees there are. At least
150,000 must have come from the interior, 200,000 more is the minimum
for Smyrna itself. Certainly not more than 50,000 left before the fire.
16,000 have gone since. 80,000 are in sight in camps, streets and houses.
Men from 18 to 45 years of age are being seized and deported into the
interior, estimates varying from 40,000 to 125,000. But where are the rest?
Sept 20 The seizing of all men of military age, and on both sides of the age
line, is being energetically pushed. The process completed in a given
camp, though women and children are thrust out into the streets, the prey of
both soldiers and civilian Turkish rabble.
Two British boats took off 7000 refugees today to Mitylene. But as a
whole the evacuation situation is desperate. In ten more days Turkish
permission (to remove people from Smyrna) expires.
The American navy again goes into the orphanage business...
Jennings charters space on the Italian S/S “Constantinople” and we take
off 1500 refugees, many of whom pay their passage. Jennings proceeds
with them to Mitylene.
The Armenians and Greeks who left Turkey in 1922 and 1923 as refugees
were angry at the Turks, and that anger has been passed down to subsequent
generations of people most of whom have never visited Turkey or have any
first hand knowledge of what occurred or the reasons therefore. The Turks
who suffered much greater losses did not bequeath this passion of hate to
their offspring, and more regard that period as just one more like the wars
with Russia. The Jews left Turkey to escape the violence rather than due to
issues of loyalty. The Jews were victims of violence and did not cause the
violence. The emigration from Smyrna, and subsequently from all other ports
of Turkey, 1,250,000 people in all, was exceeded only by the Holocaust as
the greatest emigration for Jews in the 20th Century, or any group of people,
to escape violence. The Jews scattered around the world, and their story has
been largely lost to history. There was death and substantial suffering en
route to the final destinations of all these peoples, but the option of staying in
Turkey would have been worse. Moving to countries at peace saved lives
and provided opportunities for better lives for these people and their unborn
children.
Captain A. J. Hepburn, U.S. Navy, Senior American Naval Officer
Present, wrote a report to the Secretary of the Navy that was forwarded by
RADM Mark L. Bristol from the flagship U.S.S. Scorpion of the U.S. Naval
Detachment, Eastern Mediterranean located in Istanbul. Quoting in part:
In July, 1922, after transferring certain forces from Anatolia to Thrace the
Greek army marched against Constantinople stopping only at the Chatildja
lines where it was opposed by the Allied forces of Occupation under
General Harrington. Shortly after this in the first part of August, 1922, I
began to get rumors of a Turkish attack upon the Greeks in Anatolia. As
time went on those reports became more substantial, so that, when the
attack came on 20 of August, I was not surprised. I felt that there was a
strong probability that this attack would be successful and the Greek army
would at least have to fall back to its original lines around Smyrna. I knew
that any successes by the Turks would be followed by a general revulsion
of feeling amongst all the Turks against Christian races. I felt certain that
the Greeks, if they had to fall back, would commit all kinds of outrages and
excesses and undoubtedly devastate the country as they retreated.
Though I did not feel that Americans would be directly attacked I knew
that the disorder would be such that I would have to provide for their
safety. At this time the U.S. Naval Detachment was still assisting the
American Relief Administration in South Russia and making regular visits
to the ports of Odessa, Theodosia and Hovorossisk, and occasional visits
to other Russian ports in the Black Sea. In addition it was necessary to
maintain a destroyer continuously at Samson and to make frequent visits to
other ports in Turkey and the Levant.
The mission of the destroyers was to cover all places where American
interests and American citizens were located, but at that time with the
seven destroyers at my disposal I was not able fully to carry out this work.
I desire to state right at once that if it had not been for the very efficient
way in which the officers and men of the Detachment carried out their
duties and, especially, kept their boats ready for all calls at all times, the
work of the Detachment would have been still more crippled...However, I
felt compelled to ask for extra destroyers to protect American lives and
interests. Twelve destroyers arrived to reinforce the Turkish Detachment
on October 22, 1922, followed by the U.S.S. BRIDGE and other ships.
The lack of an organized effort by the Turkish civilians and troops in
Smyrna to take reprisals upon the refugees there indicates conclusively that
the Turks were not especially desirous of taking reprisals. The people
killed in Smyrna were killed as a result of robberies, individual feuds and
the usual brutal attitude of Moslems towards Christians under such unusual
conditions. The evidence is conclusive that they were not killed by
organized military or civil forces. I would most emphatically report, all
reports to the contrary notwithstanding, that there was no massacre in
Smyrna at this time, and the people killed were victims of mob violence
due to a lack of control of the situation by responsible Turkish officials.
The only evidence of real reprisals was the particular enmity shown
towards the Armenians, and this enmity is accounted for by the operations
of Armenian bands against the Moslems in the Smyrna area during the
Greek occupation. These facts explain what occurred in Smyrna, but the
Turkish officials can never excuse themselves or relieve themselves of the
responsibility for not having taken the necessary steps to patrol the city,
maintain order, and thus secure the safety of lives and property.
As previously stated, the robbing, looting and disturbances began in
Smyrna before the Turks occupied the city. Also people were killed and
small fires were started. The occupation of Smyrna by the Turkish troops
had a quieting effect, as did also the proclamations issued by Turkish
authorities. The lack of patrols and organized effort to preserve peace was
a natural encouragement to the disorderly element to resume all kinds of
outrages with increased efforts. Under such encouragement Turkish
officers and men joined the civilians in looting, robbing and killing. Fires
were started and no effort was made to stop them or to prevent the
spreading of them. The unusual direction of the wind and the strength of it
spread the fire to the Christian and foreign districts and made it
impossible, after the fire got started, to get it under control with the fire
fighting appliances available, even if these had been seriously utilized. If
the usual wind, ‘inbat’, which usually blows from a westerly direction had
prevailed the fires would have burned themselves out with very little
damage. There is nothing to indicate that the Turks could have foreseen this
unusual direction and strength of the wind. Therefore, the accusation that
the burning of Smyrna was a deliberate act of the Turks to destroy the
Christians and foreign quarter is hard to believe. That the Turks did start
fires in the Christian quarter is decidedly believable. That the Christians
should have set fire to their own houses before evacuating them is highly
probable, especially in view of the fact that, when they evacuated the
interior, they set fire to their own villages before they left them, and
further, to the fact that Greek officers had openly stated before the
evacuation of Smyrna that, if they had to evacuate, they would burn the
city. There is no evidence that the Greek army carried out his threat or that
there was any organization on the part of the Christians to burn their own
part of the city before evacuating.
The evidence in this report of the attitude of the Turkish officials the day
after the fire and before they could have known of any accusation against
them seems to indicate very clearly that they had not ordered or
sympathized with the burning of Smyrna. It would be natural to believe that
the Turks would not want to destroy an important city like Smyrna, which
they had just captured and considered a most valuable prize of war.
However, legally and technically, because the Turkish officials in
command did not take the necessary precaution to utilize patrols and
guards to preserve order and prevent disturbances in the city of Smyrna,
these officials, and therefore the Turkish Government, are responsible for
the burning of Smyrna.
Previously the comment was made that huge dividends were paid by the
U.S. not joining with its Allies to occupy any part of Turkey or to take any
negative action towards Turkey. In fact, during World War One when the U.S.
and Turkey were technically at war the U.S. missionaries and others were
welcome in Turkey for their positive performance on behalf of the Turks.
Then Captain Hepburn wrote:
There is to be noted in this report the cordial relations which greatly
assisted our relief work that continually existed between the Turkish
authorities and the American officials in Smyrna, as well as with the
American civil population in Smyrna. This I attribute not only to the tactful
conduct of American officials at the time in Smyrna, but especially to the
conduct of the American naval officials throughout the time that the United
States Naval Detachment had been in Turkish waters. Our naval vessels
have been received in all ports of Turkey at all times very cordially and
even at times when the naval vessels of other nations were not allowed to
enter the ports; or even, as an example, when in Samson the boat from a
British destroyer that attempted to land was warned off the dock by an
armed guard. The American destroyers had established a reputation of
having no political designs and of being in the ports simply on peaceful
errands. This meant that these destroyers could lend a preparedness of
influence for the protection of Christians in all the ports visited by these
destroyers.
Mrs. Amy W. Jennings, wife of Asa K. Jennings, was quoted on October
26, 1922, in the Watertown (New York) Daily Times:
Mrs. Jennings pays a high tribute to the work of the American sailors ‘most
of them boys of barely 20,’ as she describes them, and of the ‘staggering,
starved army of Greeks, who had fought nine months on no pay and no
food, save bread and olives.’
Her last night in Smyrna was one of untold horror. Her statement that it
was ‘the blackest page in modern history’ is born out by the meager details
she reveals, though obviously she is trying to forget the awful experience
through which she was forced to go.
We arrived in Smyrna, August 16, after having been in Europe for two
years, says Mrs. Jennings. In order that the children might go to school we
lived at the International College in Paradise, a small place about four
miles from the city proper. Mr. Jennings went back and forth to his work in
the city in an automobile, always coming home early enough in the evening
so there was still light enough to see the American flag on the car.
When the evacuation commenced, for nine days refugees poured into the
city, about 30,000 of them arrived daily. Our college, which covered 2
acres, formed a haven for hundreds of people who were allowed to sleep
in the chapel and gymnasium, while the campus was filled with horses,
cows, donkeys and household goods.
Including students and American families, there were more than 1,500 of
us in the place, and for protection we had 18 American sailors. No one of
us was permitted to even cross the school grounds without a sailor guard.
They were just youngsters, most of them around 20 years, but they did the
work of veterans. One of them, who had been in the World War, said he
had never been under such a strain before, because of thinking of many
lives depended on a single man.
Mrs. Jennings told of the experience of Dr. MacLachlan, president of the
college, who set out with a handful of sailors one day to endeavor to
prevent the Turks from looting a settlement house outside the gates.
We couldn’t see them, for we were inside the walls, but we heard what
was going on, Mrs. Jennings explained. The Turks fired at the sailors at
close range and their chief called to them, ‘Run for your lives, boys, but
for God’s sake, don’t fire.’ They escaped by racing zig-zag behind a stone
wall.
The Turks stopped Dr. MacLachlan and clubbed him until he was bleeding.
Certainly a pleasant way of showing gratitude to the white-haired man who
had worked among them for 30 years. Then the Americans were ordered to
undress and give up their money. A revolver was even taken from the
officer in charge of the sailors. A Turk went to stab Dr. MacLachlan with a
bayonet, but he grabbed it and wrenched it from its holder. The blade cut
his hands.
Finally a Turkish officer came along and interfered and ordered offenders
to give back the clothing. When Dr. McLaughlin finally got away, he had to
be carried in.
That last night, continues Mrs. Jennings, when ten of us American women
at the college were taken into Smyrna to go aboard the destroyer Simpson,
which escorted us to Athens, we drove through streets abandoned, save for
heaps of dead bodies, wrecked cars and groups of dreadful looking
Turkish soldiers.
Most of the bodies were horribly mutilated, arms chopped off, women’s
breasts carved away and throats slashed. When a Turk can use a knife, he
never uses a gun.
Maybe this is why the Turks today do not know the history of Smyrna.
However, if both Greeks and Turks, today, acknowledge the conduct of their
ancestors, the air can be cleared and a new relationship created based on
mutual respect.
MAN’S INHUMANITY TO MAN
O
h, Lord, why do men commit such acts against each other? What do we not
understand? How do we prevent this destruction of the human race?
The Ottoman Turks were a militaristic society that was organized to
conquer and control. To control, they treated people in harsh ways that bread
contempt that has sublimated into the Greek DNA (designation of genetic
inheritance). By the standards of today, there is no relieving the Ottoman
Turks of their responsibility. As Christians, all we can do is remember the
words of Jesus Christ. “Father, forgive them; for they know not what they
do.” Luke 23:34. That is our obligation as Christians.
The Greeks were finally free of the Ottoman Turks by 1830. That could
have been the end of the suffering. The Greeks needed a common focus. The
Megali Idea was a huge mistake by the politicians. For the first 90 so years
Greece expanded its territory, and one can argue that was good. However,
the entry into World War One when it was clear that the Allies would win the
War so that Greece could share in the spoils of war was a dishonorable
objective. Such a purpose was contrary to the message of Christianity. The
Church failed the Greek people.
Landing Greek troops at Smyrna in 1919 was an invasion. If the Turks had
landed their troops on Greek soil, the Greek people would have considered
that an invasion. The Golden Rule tells us that Greece should have never
landed troops in Smyrna. The problems in Greece today can be traced back
to that fateful decision.
The Greek people, or any people, do not want war. They are led to war by
misguided fools for their own reasons and ego. A democracy is a pluralistic
form of government designed to prevent monopolistic decisions that lead to
aggression. Greece did not have those controls in place. The Greek
politicians argued and disagreed to such an extent that Greece could not
govern itself. For that reason, the Allies, led by Russia required that a
monarch be appointed. That was not pluralistic. The politicians lied as
politicians do about why the Greek people should send their sons to war. For
a democracy to function, the public must be educated and informed. That is
the major challenge.
The Ottoman Turks were allies of the losers in World War One. The
Ottoman Turkish empire was a shell of its former greatness. They were
known as the “sick man of Europe.” The Turks willingly gave up their
territories like Syria, Iraq and more. They did not surrender their identity.
The occupation of Turkish soil by the Italians, French, British and Greeks
was a lawless act. This was a challenge to the sovereignty of the Turkish
people. The Turks were poor, uneducated and unorganized, but they had a
national identity. The Turks had a man who was arguably the greatest leader
of a government ever. He ignited that national identity, formed an army, and
despite being the weaker force in each battle, defeated his opponents. The
Turkish people followed him with enthusiasm. His word was law, but not out
of fear. The Turkish people loved and respected him and his judgment on
their behalf. He did not fail them or violate that trust they placed in him.
Today it would be accurate to say he is semi-deified by Turkish people. He
was and is considered a leader, the “father of the Turks,” rather than a
politician.
The Turks were defending their sovereignty, their independence. That is
not an aggressive act, but rather a defensive act. No parent wants their
children going to war, but when defense of the nation is as stake, war is
authorized. So war is authorized to defend a country, but not to attack another
country.
In all wars both sides in the war do terrible things to the other side. That is
going to happen and cannot be completely prevented. Organized and
disciplined military forces can be controlled. The Greek army and Turkish
army were not well controlled, and unspeakable violence occurred. Violence
feeds more violence. Those who have never served in the military during
wartime have no concept of the mentality when it is kill or be killed. The
concept cannot even be explained satisfactorily to those who have never
served.
A major reason for the violence was the absence of civil authority in
Turkey before the Greek army landed in 1919. There was a high incidence of
violence in all forms. A lot of the violence became identified with ethnic
background. However, that violence was personal rather than organized by
government.
There was a substantial Jewish population in Turkey. They were not
contentious with other ethnic groups. In all the letters, diaries, reports and
other records of the violence between 1919 and 1922 there was never that I
have seen anyone mentioned as being Jewish. The Jews backed away from
violence and respected authority. That is the law of the U.S. today. If
someone offends or attacks another person, that person only has the right to
defend them self. They do not have the right to attack. That tradition of public
behavior did not exist in Turkey for many people. Obviously, such should be
taught and instilled in society as a belief of all people.
The Armenian culture bred a hatred of Turks rather than an understanding
of why violence would hurt the Armenian people more than help them. The
Armenians were a minority in a militaristic society. Confronting the
authorities and Turkish people was poor judgment by the Armenians, and
they paid a heavy price. The Armenian people would have been better
served conducting themselves like the Jews did. Being a minority is like
being a tourist in another country. As a tourist we should respect the laws and
customs of that country. We should walk away from a fight and not pick a
fight.
Now we understand why this tragedy occurred. How then is ethnic
violence prevented in a society that does not have the institutions to prevent
violence?
In Turkey, Asa K. Jennings arranged in 1922 to move the minorities out of
Turkey to Greece where they would be safe from violence. Years later India
divided its country into India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
The mistake George H. Bush made was believing in the Pollyanna idea
that Sunni and Shia Muslims could get along with each other and get along
with Kurds who the Arabs had been trying to extinguish in a genocide. The
Sunni and Shia have not agreed on succession within their faith since the
death of their prophet Mohammed. Mohammed died in 632 A.D. and the
Sunni and Shia have been fighting ever since. Tolerance is not a requirement
of Islam, but became a prescription of Christianity with the New Testament.
George H. Bush was not going to be able to settle that dispute. To think he
would shows he lacked critical understanding of this important area of the
world. His inexperience cost the U.S. dearly in blood and treasure. Iraq
should have been divided into three sovereign states and the people moved
like the people of India according to religion.
The problems in Turkey and India were solved with competent leadership,
the kind of leadership Greece and Iraq have never had. When the state fails,
people suffer.
The Greek people in 1922 were very fortunate despite their politicians.
There was a heart of a lion in one man. The self-serving politicians had the
population of Greece divided between Royalists and supporters of Venizelos
which led to a coup days after the rescue started of nearly 20% of the Greek
population. Even in this most critical time for the Greek people, the
politicians could not put their disputes aside and come together for the good
of their nation. The politicians of Greece would have stood by idly while
1,250,000 people expired in Turkey, except for the initiative of one man who
found support from Gazi Mustafa Kemal and Captain Theofanides.
The minorities in Turkey had to be saved by someone whose moral
compass pointed true, a person committed to others rather than self, a person
who the Ecumenical Patriarch said was blessed by the right hand of God in
Christianity.
Who is this man, and where does a person like this come from?
THE AMERICAN RELIEF COMMITTEE
T
he American community in Smyrna was small, and all the Americans knew
each other. Asa K. Jennings had been a community organizer in places like
Czechoslovakia and Upstate New York as minister and employee of the
YMCA.
When the crisis started in August 1922 Asa formed the American Relief
Committee. The members were all Americans. They included the President
of the International College, employees of the American tobacco and oil
companies and other business interests, and employees of the YMCA and
YWCA. Each person was empowered with a title and assignment. Someone
was appointed to meet and work with local government officials. Another
person was assigned to get ships to remove refugees from the danger.
Locating food and fuel to bake bread was a major priority.
The task ahead of them was to feed, protect, and ultimately evacuate to
safety 25,000 Jews, 25,000 Armenians and 300,000 Greeks. If the American
Relief Committee failed, these people would die at the hands of the Turks.
The Turkish plan was to march these people to the interior of Turkey and
their deaths. These numbers were provided by U.S. Consul General George
Horton, and confirmed by the Greeks themselves who survived this
Holocaust.
The Chairman was Caleb W. Lawrence. He wrote to Mr. Van Bommel:
I have been going over again, in memory, the events of the past month and I
have now to write you regarding your colleagues Mr. E. O. Jacob and Mr.
A.K. Jennings.
When the first Committee was formed Mr. E.O. Jacob was absent at
Phocia, and therefore Mr. Jennings was given an important appointment as
head of the General Relief Department. With his well known fearlessness
and energy he drove his Chevrolet through all parts of the city, locating
refugees and collecting them in camps. He obtained possession of a house,
#490 Quai, which he immediately filled with women and children. He was
soon obliged to provide for maternity cases and therefore he set apart one
room for a maternity ward. Several confinements were cared for in this
ward. #490 filled up until there were some 500 people in it. Mr. Jennings
then got possession of other houses into which he thrust defenseless girls,
children and women. He cared for those helpless people, often missing his
meals and frequently getting only one meal a day.
D.A. Davis, Senior Secretary for Europe of the International Committee of
Young Men’s Christian Associations of North America, wrote on February
19, 1923, to C.V. Hibbard of the YMCA in New York City:
Last Thursday I spent a very full day in Athens with A.K. Jennings.
Together we called upon the Minister of Public Welfare, who has charge
of all the refugees in Greece; the Minister of War, the Chief of the
Revolutionary Committee, who is practically the dictator of Greece today;
and the Minister of Foreign Affairs. In addition to this we met the official
Turkish delegate on the commission to take charge of the exchange of the
prisoners and took him to the Palace where the commission was meeting
and introduced him. It is an interesting fact that the Turkish delegate whose
absence delayed the work of the commission for nearly a week, afterward
arrived in the American battleship at the request of the YMCA.
I think that no one would contradict the statement that Jennings is the best
known and most loved American in the Near East today. I was astonished
to see the entree which he has everywhere he goes. I have been with him
now in Athens, Smyrna, and Constantinople. Everywhere he seems to be
known. Practically no request which he makes in any quarter is refused.
The story of what he has done is one of the most fascinating of any that I
have heard in connection with the war. He has been too busy to write much
about it up to the present time. He is constantly on the go. For more than a
week during the evacuation he had practically no sleep, some of his
greatest work being done as a result of his arousing governors, admirals,
and members of the cabinet from their beds between midnight and five
o’clock in the morning.
I am wondering whether there was ever a time in Greek history where a
Greek cabinet president was called out of bed at five o’clock in the
morning and succeeded in having a cabinet meeting before nine o’clock
before Jennings came along. To a most unusual extent Jennings has the
confidence of all the American organizations working in the Near East as
well as all the American consular, diplomatic, and naval authorities. When
we boarded the ‘McFarland’ the captain put Jennings in his own bed. This
is an indication of the respect I have seen paid to him everywhere.
There are two definite jobs which Jennings feels that he is still bound to
see through; and after seeing the authorities in Greece and Turkey and
being able to observe the extra-ordinary unofficial role which he is
playing, I am convinced that it would be a mistake for us to call him away
before these two tasks are really finished. These tasks are the exchange of
prisoners and the transportation of refugees. It is quite possible that before
this is done there will be mixed with it the question of the exchange of
populations between Greece and Turkey.
Jennings read me about thirty pages of a report on the evacuation which he
has written. It would still be illegible to any one else and he has promised
to put that in shape and as soon as possible to bring us up to date. It is too
much to expect, however, that he will ever give us very detailed reports of
his work; first of all because he is too busy doing things to talk about them,
and doing things that are really worth while; and, secondly, because he is
withal modest and hesitates to report things that seem to be telling about
his own accomplishments. Incidentally I might say that I saw the Greek
Patriarch Meletios present him today with the Gold Order of the
Redeemer, which decoration had already be awarded but had not
previously been presented.
Jennings has been, is and unless we force him out intends to remain till his
work here is finished as YMCA secretary. He has refused offers of any
salary he wished to name from other organizations.
From the report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine (nee Anita McCormick, daughter
of Cyrus McCormick, the inventor of the mechanical reaper. She was later
married in Richfield Springs, New York):
After the refugees had been transferred to Greece, much emergency work
was absolutely essential, and the American people responded most
generously and at once to meet this emergency.
Unfortunately, however, all our relief work at this time as well as after the
war was confined to relief among the so-called Christian nationalities.
This was true also of our work for the orphans of the Near East, forgetting
that all who suffered, Turks as well as Armenians and Greeks, were
members of the human family and suffered alike; and that the children of
Turkish birth were no more responsible for their condition and position as
helpless orphans than the orphans whom we helped.
As a result of AKJ’s work with the American Relief Committee, he was
invited to the Lausanne Conference.
It was my privilege also to be present at the first Lausanne Conference
between the Turks and the Allies; and I was requested to serve as one of
the members of the Commission to Exchange Prisoners, unofficially,
however, as only members of non-belligerent nations were eligible to
membership on this Commission.
However, the Turkish member of this Commission and the Greek member,
together with the President, who was a Swiss, asked me to serve and I did.
Admiral Bristol again put at the service of the Commission American
destroyers, thus greatly facilitating our work. All this experience brought
me in close contact with the Turkish people and with Turkish officials, and
I obtained an understanding of their point of view as well as their great
needs. I learned then the heroic struggle the Turks were honestly making, in
spite of the fact that they felt that the Christians and Christian nations were
all against them.
Naturally, this is not to be wondered at when you consider the propaganda
that as been given out in this country. But after living with the Turks and
learning their point of view, and hearing something of the other side of the
story, one learns not only to be tolerant, but he realizes if he is to be true to
himself, he must be fair and just. It was because I tried to be fair with
myself that I felt called to enlist what little influence I might have and what
service I might render for the aid of the Turkish people.
Not discounting the needs, or without lack of appreciation of assistance for
the Greeks and Armenians, I felt that we should have shared our
sympathies and our service and help with the Turks. I believe what the
Turkish nation has done since they have gained their independence has not
been duplicated at any other time in history by any other nation.
They have started out in the western way, and have taken the idea of self-
determination most seriously. The separation of church and state was a
drastic measure, but it was accomplished. Abolishing the fez, and
substituting the western headgear, is something that can only be
appreciated by those who have lived in Oriental countries.
Discarding the ancient law based on the Koran, and adopting the Swiss
Civil Code and the Italian Criminal Code, has revolutionized the system of
law in that country. As a result of this, the development of the rights of
women has been a great factor in their progress. The Koran and the state
law permitted a man to have four wives. The present law forbids a man to
have more than one.
Previously, divorce could be had at the will of the husband by simply
pronouncing his wife divorced three times in the presence of witnesses.
Now it is impossible for a man to divorce his wife without due process of
law, or without adequately providing for her support. And he cannot
divorce her without cause.
The new educational system provides for universal education, which is
compulsory. It should be said that as yet there are not sufficient teachers
nor are there adequate school buildings to provide for all of the children of
school age. But the government is making every effort possible to make
provision for this need At the preset time abandoned buildings and houses
are being used for school purposes.
There has been some criticism of Turkey as being an autocracy instead of a
republic as claimed. Those of us who live in Turkey admit, if you wish for
the sake of argument, that Turkey today is a benevolent autocracy. But it is
not the former Turkey, an imperialistic Turkey, a monarchy, a theocracy.
Turkey today is a republic in spirit. Those who know the Turkish leaders
and are familiar with the struggles and the sacrifices the people are making
know that their leaders do care for the people; and in every way possible
they are seeking to provide the people with a representative form of
government. Their purpose is to grant equal rights to all, especially this is
true as regards the women and children.
Commercially, since the withdrawal of the Greeks and the Armenians,
business has been left chiefly in the hands of the Turks. The Jews fare
better than they did with the Greeks and Armenians in the country. The few
Americans who are there, the French, the English and others continue to do
business.
What the government wishes is that their own people shall develop the
ability to administer their own affairs, commercially and economically, as
well as educationally and socially. As the result of this new life, new
social conditions evolved. Women who had been secluded are beginning
to come out. Young people are beginning to be seen together on the streets
for the first time and in public places such as parks and entertainments and
parties.
The offer of Admiral Bristol, on behalf of the U.S. Navy, to provide ships
to AKJ was critical. During the negotiations regarding the exchange of
Prisoners of War, the Turks said they would provide one Greek prisoner the
Turks held in exchange for a Turk the Greeks held. If you understand the
Turkish persona, as AKJ did, you don’t argue with a Turk. They are
intransigent. AKJ’s leadership was non-confrontational. As a social worker
most of his life, he was never in a position to dictate to anyone. So he
learned to achieve his objectives by other methods. He simply accepted the
Turkish demand without making an issue of it. However, there was a
problem. The Turks held many Greeks as prisoners, and the Greeks held very
few Turks.
The prisoners were repatriated using U.S. Navy ships in such a way that
Turkey could not keep count. AKJ just ignored the Turkish demand and
proceeded with his work in the name of humanity.
This Turkish Reformation would not have occurred without the leadership
and vision of Gazi Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, and his greatness would not have
been created without the invasion of Turkey by the Greeks. Turkey started
this transformation as a destitute nation mired in the 16th century while
Greece was a western nation with the advantages a free society brings. The
transformation of Turkey in the sixteen short years between founding of the
Turkish Republic in 1923 and Ataturk’s death in 1938 was miraculous.
Turkey in subsequent years has grown and prospered as a peaceful nation
beyond the wildest dreams of anyone. Meanwhile, Greece sinks further into
the debt that oppresses the Greek people. Worse, the Greek people do not
have any vision of how to extract themselves from a ruinous history.
AKJ, commenting on his life’s work, said his major achievement was not
his role in saving 1,250,000 people from death, or being selected by Greece
and Turkey which hated each other after a bitter war to serve to repatriate
prisoners of war and population exchange. He felt his major contribution was
his role in the transformation of Turkey from the backward, ancient society to
a modern society based on Western principles. His selfless service was
carried on by his son Asa W. Jennings.
Paramount to AKJ’s service was his believe that the Turks must not be
given anything. They must earn what they receive. The Turks were always
looking for the American hand out. AKJ refused. AKJ acted as an advisor,
not a wealthy philanthropist. He, in fact, was not wealthy, and could not draw
on the resources of the United States government. There was no foreign aid,
or should we say, gift. The Turks had to work for what they achieved, and
they became a better nation as a result. By contrast, the Greeks since their
independence have lived off the product of other countries in the form of
national debt.
Writing to Mrs. Emmons Blaine, AKJ said:
What the (Turkish) people are really trying to do along all lines is to help
themselves, and to become in the development of their country a nation to
be respected, and to attain a rightful place among the family of nations.
The work I am connected with at the present time in Turkey is an endeavor
to help the people help themselves along the lines they have so wisely
chosen and in a way that they can understand.
Our purpose in doing this is, first, to help them to build personality and
develop character.
Second, to cooperate with them in working out a method of evoking the
spirit of brotherhood, not only among people in Turkey, but between the
Turkish people and others.
And, third, a motive for service founded on the principle of love and
mutual respect. And to achieve this, we are seeking with them to train a
reliable personnel, develop their own agencies, organizations and
institutions, and work out a program acceptable to them, and which they
themselves will be responsible for creating.
We are interested in releasing human life and in the development of
character; not erecting buildings or promoting any specific form of dogma,
creed or religion.
A simple mission to save and protect lives evolved into a mission to
release human life to achieve its peaceful possibilities.
After the work of the American Relief Committee was completed, Asa
was asked by the King of Greece and the Turks to stay on for humanitarian
work. He could not do both. The Greeks were a western country with many
advantages. The Turks were destitute economically and socially. He chose
the Turks as being more in need. In the report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine he
said:
After the work in Turkey which was of a general nature, we took up
specifically the demonstration of a concrete plan of cooperation and
service in Smyrna, in order to help them to realize some of the new
humanitarian and social aspirations of the people, under the new
republican form of government; and at the same time to develop a definite
program which would not only help the people who came in direct contact
with our efforts, but help to promote a better understanding between the
people of Turkey and America.
That man with the heart where the lion sleeps shows its character in many
ways.
I have for many years been connected with the national organization of the
YMCA. That institution has two branches in Constantinople. These
organizations are considered by the Turks as foreign institutions, and the
very word ‘Christian’ has an entirely opposite meaning in the minds of the
Turkish people; a word with which they associate the Crusades and the
intrigues of representatives of Christianity rather than with the
consciousness of the American people; to whom the word ‘Christian’
means a way of life, rather than a creed, dogma or political conception.
The YMCA is doing splendid work in Constantinople, but Constantinople
is a cosmopolitan city. Smyrna is a Turkish city. Asia Minor also, outside
of Constantinople, is entirely Turkish today. The slogan of ‘Turkey for the
Turks’ is as significant in the minds of the Turks as ‘America for the
Americans’. They insist upon developing their own institutions, and do not
propose to have foreign institutions imposed upon them.
A “Community Welfare Council” was created with Aziz Bey, who was
formerly governor of Gallipoli, Magnasia and Smyrna, and eight other
representative Turkish leaders in official, educational and business
circles, making nine Turks in all, and three Americans, the president of the
American college for Boys in Smyrna, the director of the Gary Tobacco
Company, and myself.
This done, we worked out a program of activities under three heads; social
work, publications and practical education courses, and physical
education. The social work, for example, included the establishment of a
baby home staffed by Turks. Sewing societies provided the clothes for the
babies. The shoemakers’ union contributed shoes for the babies. The first
children’s clinic was established with a Turkish nurse and doctor. This
was the first child welfare program in Turkey, and a model for others to
follow. Then there was the day nursery so mothers could work and leave
their small children, unprotected children, at a safe location. The tobacco
and fruit packing industries gave employment to thousands of women, but
there was no nursery. The women and their employers supported the
nursery.
Among publications received from America in our search for help, was a
collection of twelve letters published by the Department of Health of the
City of Chicago. These letters have been translated into Turkish, and are
being sent each month to mothers for a period of twelve months. They seek
to instruct the mother how to feed and care for her child during the first
year of its life.
This also proved a great service. The Minister of the Interior of Angora
wrote the director of public health in Smyrna and said that these
publications had been brought to his attention, and he wished to commend
them; and asked for their widest possible circulation throughout the
country. The entire cost of translation, publication and distribution of these
letters was paid for from American funds.
Then there was the summer camp where families with boys and girls
mixed playing games and enjoyed playing in the sea. Of course, there were
people who were suspicious of the intentions of foreigners.
This spirit has been kept alive through the explosive mixture of religion
and politics in the combination of church and state, and the lack of
opportunity for independent thinking; also the lack of a system of education
free from religious and political control.
The playgrounds provided a competitive environment for young people
who remained friends after the event regardless of who won or lost. Such
tolerance was not part of the ancient Muslim society, but was important to
changing Turkey into a peaceful nation.
An agreement was reached with the city to create an athletic field.
The entire field was graded and reduced to a level. A 400 meter cinder
running track was made, and the field was fenced. We put up a building in
which we provided four dressing rooms for opposing teams, as well as
rooms for the officials. In between these rooms for opposing teams we
provided a bathroom with twelve showers, the first and only ones of a
public nature in Smyrna.
Great interest in sports has been aroused. The administration of this field
has been placed in our hands, because they believe that we will give
everyone a fair show, and they agreed to abide by our decisions.
On the field no obscene language is permitted, and only fair play and clean
sports tolerated. This phase of work is having a far reaching influence, and
is one of the great factors today in developing a high standard of
sportsmanship. This is the best sport field in Turkey. What is being done
there is watched throughout the entire country.
This was leadership by example with the majority of the management
being Turkish. Good news spreads, and these programs were copied around
Turkey. While Gazi Mustafa Kemal Ataturk was closing mosques and
banishing mullahs, he was encouraging AKJ to open similar facilities all
over Turkey. These facilities, in the last analysis, were designed on the
Christian model of ethical behavior without ever using the word Christian.
WHAT MADE JENNINGS DIFFERENT
A
sa K. Jennings (AKJ) was born September 20, 1877, in Ontario, New
York. Ontario was a rural town about 20 miles east of Rochester, NY, and
just south of Lake Ontario, the smallest and most easterly of the Great Lakes.
Most people lived on farms and worked 6 days a week.
Asa was the 3rd of 6 children born to Hiram Jennings (b. Aug. 18,1841; d.
Sept. 19, 1918) and Emma Carey Jennings (b. Oct. 6, 1851; d. Feb. 15,
1936). Living conditions by the standards of today were hard, and no child
was privileged. They faced a life of hard work and love as their reward.
One has only to live in Upstate New York to know how cold it gets during
winter. A month of 30 degrees below zero F. is not uncommon. There can be
mountains of snow and particularly located next to the Lake where there is
lake effect snow. The houses of 1877 did not have insulation and windows
had only a single pane of glass. The cold air would go through the houses.
There was no indoor plumbing. So people visited the outhouse to relieve
their bodily needs. My Father, Asa W. Jennings (AWJ) said he would go to
the outhouse in the winter, pull his pants down, but be so cold that he could
not take care of his personal business. So he would pull his pants up, go back
in the house, but then had the need to go to the outhouse again. Yet, in the
family diaries and letters there is not one complaint about the cold weather
or harsh conditions. A hard life is what they expected.
A typical week was to work on the farm long hours Monday through
Saturday. Sunday the family went to church, had a large meal at noon, and
had only Sunday afternoon to visit with friends. Working on a farm did not
involve seeing many people. Neighbors helped each other raising barns and
other work when help was required. Seeing friends at church and neighbors
broke the boredom of repetitive work. Social life revolved around church
life.
The first electricity in Upstate New York was in Buffalo in 1895 after a
hydro electric facility was built. So the farm did not have electric lights after
the sun went down, or electrical implements to make farming easier. Fields
were tilled with a plow behind a horse.
There were no newspapers, radio, television, and, of course, computers.
Families made their own entertainment. So many people played musical
instruments. Many people read the Bible daily. There were no cars or
grocery stores. People grew their own food and preserved food. The glass
ball jar for home canning was invented in Buffalo, New York, in 1886. There
were no freezers or preservatives for foods. People had root cellars, and
would cut ice in the lakes during the winter to keep storage areas cold. Being
Methodists, alcohol and smoking were forbidden. Food was not pickled in
alcohol as a preservative. Other than the lack of medical personnel and
medicines, people lived a healthy life style with physical work in fresh air.
The air became polluted with the industrialization of World War Two,
growth of population and the large increase in the number of automobiles. I
can remember flying in the late 1940s with my Father AWJ in his plane over
Long Island where the air was crystal clear and the sky was blue, until we
approached New York City. There was a dirty brown cloud like a mushroom
that hung over New York City. The healthy life style of the 1800s and early
1900s and clean environment contributed to so many people living long
lives. You never, for example, heard of the diseases of today like cancer, high
blood pressure, allergies and addictions of all kinds.
In the Hiram and Emma Jennings family, the first born was a son Lewis (b.
Nov. 2, 1873; d. March 11, 1967). Then Edith (b. Nov. 18, 1880; d. Feb. 9,
1974) was the second child. She married a Free Methodist minister. After
Asa in 1877 came Hiram (b. Oct. 10, 1884) and then the twins Ruth and
Raymond (b. May 29, 1889). Raymond died at age 2 and 9 months of spinal
meningitis. Spinal meningitis is an inflammation of the protective membranes
covering the brain and spinal cord. The sickness is caused by bacteria and is
contagious. An anti-serum from the blood of horses was not developed until
1907. The best treatment is penicillin, but that was not discovered until 1928.
So spinal meningitis was almost always fatal.
Most diseases were the result of poor sanitation. People typically took one
bath a week, if that. Water was heated on the stove, and after one person took
a bath, the next person used the same bath water. The outhouse, or privy as it
was also called, did not have toilet paper. Toilet paper was first sold around
1867, and rolls of toilet paper were not invented until 1907, the year AWJ
was born. Paper was first advertised as splinter-free in the 1930s. Chamber
pots were commonly used, especially at night, so people did not have to go
out into the cold. The environment could not have been pleasant.
Working on the farm people were not exposed to herbicides. Herbicides
were not developed until after World War Two. The only weed control was
tillage. So the working environment was clean, but the quality of produce had
to be affected.
Families typically included a lot of children, but disease and accidents
took their toll. There was no birth control other than abstinence. Children
typically were born at home. The medical profession and development of
medicines were in their infancy by the standards of today. People did not
have abortions. Divorce and children being born out of wedlock were rare.
Family bonds were strong, and family reunions were common. The Jennings
family came to these hardships of America as the Jenny family.
Hiram and Emma Jennings were very proud of their family heritage.
Family of Hiram and Emma Carey Jennings
Back row: Asa K., Lewis, Wallace
Front row: Edith, Hiram, Emma, Ruth
The objective of people coming to America was religious freedom. They
chose to endure the hardships to live in America to be free to pursue life as
they desired. That desire for freedom, however harsh the conditions, became
an American value that separates Americans today from many other peoples
of the world.
The Jennings family came to the American Colonies in 1623 as part of the
Plymouth Colony just south of Boston. This community was the first of the
American colonies. The family came as the Jenny family, and changed the
family name years later to Jennings. The Mother of Asa K. Jennings was born
as Emma Carey, and her family was also part of the Plymouth Colony. Their
family name then was Cary. Both families participated in the American
Revolutionary War to drive the British out of the Colonies. Later, both were
part of the Union Army and Navy to defeat the Confederate States in the U.S.
Civil War. The objective of the War included ending slavery of African
Americans and therefore the liberation of the human spirit.
Life in America changed little between 1623 and the early 1900’s. People
continued to live in harsh conditions with high birth rates and then death due
to infectious diseases and accidents. A detailed description of life over these
years for the Jenny and Cary families appears at the end of this book as The
Hardships of Early America.
Asa K. Jennings graduated from Webster High School in 1896. Webster,
New York, is just east of Rochester. He then attended Syracuse University in
Syracuse, New York, in the period 1900-2 until he did not have the money to
continue. AKJ went to work at the YMCA in Utica in 1901 until 1903. He
met his wife Amy Will in Utica where she was working as a secretary for a
lawyer. They married in 1902. They moved to Carthage, New York, in 1903
where AKJ was General Secretary of the YMCA. They remained there until
1905. The YMCA has served many purposes, including overnight boarding,
promotion of Christian character, sportsmanship, scholastic achievement and
vocational training. Children are taught a positive developmental experience
through making new friends, building confidence and growing self-reliance.
This was an important experience for AKJ which he would apply in Turkey
from 1923-33. In 1905 Amy and Asa Jennings were transferred back to the
Utica, New York, YMCA. In 1906 AKJ was ordained as a minister of the
Methodist Church. In those days there was insufficient income of a church to
support the pastor and his family. So the pastor was a farmer or had other
work as a source of income. This is when AKJ contracted Pott’s Disease.
Pott’s Disease
Asa K. Jennings was diagnosed with this disease in 1905. Pott’s disease is
a form of tuberculosis that occurs outside of the lungs whereby disease is
seen in the spinal vertebrae…The lower thoracic and upper lumbar vertebrae
are the areas of the spine most often affected…Pott’s disease results from the
spread of tuberculosis from other sites, often the lungs. The infection then
spreads from two adjacent vertebrae into the adjoining intervertebral disc
space. If only one vertebra is affected, the disc is normal, but if two are
involved, the disc, which is avascular, cannot receive nutrients and
collapses. The disc tissue dies and is broken down, leading to vertebral
narrowing and eventually to vertebral collapse and spinal damage.
This infectious disease is more common where public health practices
allow infections to spread, and can be the result of direct contact with a
person already infected. In 1905 the drugs to treat Pott’s Disease were not
yet available. The recommended treatment was a brace to prevent the
collapse. AKJ wore a body cast for two years, but then against the
recommendation of his doctor removed the cast himself. The result was the
spine collapsed. AKJ lost 5” of height. As horrible as this seems, to the
faithful I submit this was the work of Providence. As the reader will learn by
reading further, AKJ’s hunchback opened doors to Asa saving thousands of
lives.
AKJ’s widow Amy wrote a letter in 1942 that explains the pain and
suffering AKJ experienced. This letter also reveals the faith and character of
Asa and Amy Jennings:
I am glad you asked those questions for to me the way he kept his courage,
always smiling even through the darkest hours, and finally overcome
physical handicaps sufficiently to do the great work he did, I consider the
most amazing part of his life story, something that should encourage any
one never to give up regardless of discouragements…
When about twenty eight Mr. Jennings had his first real illness, a severe
case of typhoid with two relapses. He did not regain a normal temperature
and after a year of terrible suffering, not able to find any doctor who could
diagnose his case, I took him to the Homeopathic Hospital at Syracuse
(New York), now called the General Hospital. On Saturday we had a
council of doctors and that evening they gave me their report which was
that Mr. Jennings was tubercular through and through, lungs, throat and
bowels; that going to a western climate could not possibly help him, that
he might live a few weeks, or months, or possibly longer but all I could do
was to keep him comfortable. During three consecutive years over twenty
doctors told me the same thing but I never continued to employ a doctor
who had no hope for I did not want them to discourage me.
That Saturday evening after the doctors gave me their opinion I thought
there never was any suffering greater than mine for Sunday morning I must
tell my husband what they said. I well knew how dear life was to him and
the hopes he had for the future so I did not see how I ever could tell him
such an awful verdict. I cried and prayed all that night and in the morning I
prayed that as I opened the Bible at random I would be directed to a
passage that would give me strength to tell Mr. Jennings what the doctors
believed.
The words “at random” are emphasized by the author as the second sign of
Providence.
As I opened the Bible to St. John, 11th chapter, I wondered how I could
find courage and strength there but my eye caught the 4th verse and from
that moment, although I knew it was going to be a long hard pull, I knew he
would ultimately recover.
“This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of
God might be glorified thereby.” John 11:4 This is Providence, the protective
care of God. Family Bible
I went to the hospital and commenced first to tell him the end of the story,
that we had a promise which we must always believe in spite of every
discouragement or what doctors might say for they didn’t know everything.
He had a very strong religious faith so later when I told him what the
doctors had told me it did not give him the shock it otherwise would have.
During the following two years when the darkness of despair almost
overwhelmed us, we would talk about that promise which always gave us
strength and courage to go on.
Mr. Jennings was in that hospital eight weeks with only milk and strained
broth until he weighed only eighty-five pounds. He did not gain and often
said he felt as though if he could get up into the Adirondacks (mountains)
he would improve but they would not let him leave because he had a high
temperature. He finally told me that together we would fool the nurses, that
during the night the light was dim so they could not see he did not close his
mouth on the thermometer. Then during the day I should attract their
attention some way so he could fool them. It worked and we left for the
Seventh Lake House at Seventh Lake in the Adirondacks where we spent
that summer, and also the following summer. We had not been there long
before I discovered that his spine was curving which proved to be Pott’s
disease of the spine that had caused a double curvature which was really
causing most of his intense suffering.
For two years Mr. Jennings wore a plaster of Paris cast; and a large cold
abscess formed in the left lung with such pressure on the lung that it was
almost impossible to breathe except as he laid with his head in an open
window. This abscess from the spine drained out through the left lung
which eventually left him only 45% breathing capacity. The difficult
breathing over taxed the heart. So the heart enlarged and it was pushed to
one side by the curved spine. That caused cardiac asthma which was most
severe for he felt as though he was being hung.
One night at Seventh Lake it seemed as though he could not possibly live
until morning. It was so difficult for him to breath. The doctor told me it
would be necessary to take him to Utica the next morning for an
exploratory operation unless his temperature was down. I felt he did not
have sufficient strength to get to Utica and how earnestly I did pray that
night that his temperature would be normal in the morning although he had
carried a temperature for two years. During the night pus commenced to
gush from his mouth. He thought he was throwing up his lungs. So he
feared it might be the end. However, he could breath better and the next
morning when the doctor came to take him to the hospital he was amazed
to find his temperature NORMAL. When I told him what had happened he
said then it was a cold abscess and it had broken during the night. So Mr.
Jennings did not go to the hospital.
I do not know how I happened to believe massage would help Mr.
Jennings for not one doctor told me. However, I went to Clifton Springs
with Mr. Jennings and there I learned massage. For three years I gave him
the deep massage for an hour and a half in the morning and an hour and a
half at night and more during the night, if he was suffering intensely. Now
that our own daughter is an osteopathic physician and surgeon I believe,
although unscientific, it was that sort of principle that cured him for all the
doctors said it was as much of a miracle as any related in the Bible.
It was remarkable how our prayers, unreasonable ones you might say,
were answered during those years of suffering which always renewed our
faith. We would read the book of Job together, always interested to see
how he endured.
How many, many times Mr. Jennings said to me:
‘Amy, I can’t die yet for I feel I have a great work to do and I must go to
see Jerusalem.’
I could not understand how he would be able to do either for I was not
asking more than his life be spared which seemed so much.
At this point in the life of Asa K. Jennings, the greatest distance he had
ever traveled was from Rochester, New York, to Utica, New York, a distance
requiring about a two hour drive today. So on what was to be his deathbed,
he proclaimed he had to go to Jerusalem. Continuing with the letter of Mrs.
Amy Jennings:
This chapter I enclose gives you an idea of a small part of his life of
service and he did go to Jerusalem twice. The first time he went on an
American destroyer when he was collecting those refugees. Then two
years later when we were living in Constantinople we went. We took our
three children. The doctor said because of a nervous breakdown I had
suffered Mr. Jennings must take me to the most interesting place he knew.
Mr. Jennings recovered from the active tuberculosis but the results of that
illness always remained. From the curvature he had lost over three inches
(5” actually) in height, a chronic throat trouble which caused him to cough
terribly and the cardiac asthma. So he was never strong. In his condition
most people would want to live within easy reaching distance of a hospital
or sanitarium, if not in one, but he feared nothing. He did not fear even
death itself when he was constantly in danger during those awful days in
Smyrna. Doctors have told me had it not been for his humorous disposition
he would have passed away during the first year of his long illness. But, I
think it was the will of God that he lived to be of service to mankind. He
always believed that I saved his life but certainly I did not know what to
do, except as I was lead by a power higher than mankind for the physicians
utterly failed.
AKJ was the Methodist minister in Forestport, New York, in 1907-8
where the Author’s Father Asa W. Jennings was born in the parsonage in
1907. The family moved to the church in Trenton, New York. In 1909 Wilbur
Jennings was born in nearby Barneveld. Asa was the pastor in Richfield
Springs, New York, in 1914-15 where sister Bertha was born in 1914. Then
Asa served the church in Chateaugay, New York, during 1916-17 before
serving the YMCA in the U.S. Army. He was stationed in Newport News,
Virginia, and Camp Merritt, New Jersey, before being transferred to the
YMCA at the Army camp in Le Mans, France in 1918. After World War One
AKJ worked for the International YMCA headquartered in Geneva,
Switzerland. He was assigned to Czechoslovakia where his wife and three
children joined him. As Regional Director his duties were similar to his
experience in Carthage, New York, but the challenges were much greater. In
August 1922, AKJ and family were transferred to Smyrna, Turkey. They
traveled by boat first to Istanbul and then to Smyrna on the west coast of
Turkey.
The story of the family which produced Asa K. Jennings was one of
priorities: faith, country, family, and last, self. Christianity teaches that God
is Love. Love can be explained as giving without expecting anything in
return. If you expect something in return, that is a commercial transaction and
not Love. AKJ, and those of us reading this book, are mostly confronted by
self-serving people interested in their own position and wealth. That was not
AKJ. His actions as a Christian were what empowered him to save
1,250,000 people from certain death in Turkey. If he was interested in power
and wealth, like all the others, except a Greek Navy Captain, then AKJ
would not have been driven by the requirement of being a Christian to help
the helpless people.
As you later read about the obstacles to saving human lives, you will see
that many people who could have helped instead were only interested in their
own positions and wealth. Without the vision of the Turkish national hero
who was the Turkish leader and a Greek Navy Captain whose moral
compass pointed true, many thousands of people would have died. The
organization and initiative for the rescue operation came from a hunchback
American with the heart of a lion.
Power and wealth when used for a good purpose are desirable, but never
when ego is placed before the welfare of others. So, then, how should have
all these people conducted themselves? The answer is quite simple. The
Golden Rule can be found in Matthew 7:12 and Luke 6:13. In modern
language rather than the exact words of the King James Version of the Bible,
“do unto others as you would have others do unto you.” If that had been the
guide that people followed, a lot of suffering would have been avoided.
To learn more about Asa K. Jennings, see the 30 minute video on
https://www.vimeo.com/52745334. MGM produced a movie short titled
“Strange Destiny” about the actions of Asa K. Jennings. That movie is on
www.vimeo.com/49285170.
Family of Asa K. and Amy W. Jennings with Asa W. in back
and Wilbur in front
Asa K. Jennings in uniform in Le Mans, France
The Asa K. Jennings Family in 1932
Back row: Asa W., Bertha, Wilbur
Front row: Amy, Asa K.
ARRANGING THE RESCUE
F
rom a report written by Asa K. Jennings on April 8, 1923, and mailed to
Mr. D.A. Davis of the International Y in Geneva:
At your request I shall attempt to give a brief description of some of my
activities in the Near East just before and following the occupation of
Smyrna.
Only three days after my arrival in Smyrna in August (that would be
August 19), Mr. Jacob left to enjoy his vacation with his family at Fokiss.
Mr. Fisher had finished his duties in connection with the Boys’ Summer
Camp and left with Mrs. Fisher to enjoy their vacation in Constantinople. I
was therefore in charge of the YMCA from that time until a few days
before the occupation of the city by the Turkish troops. When Mr. Jacob
returned, the city was then full of refugees who had been pouring into the
city in advance of the retreating Greek troops and advancing Turkish Army.
The sudden break of the Greek front (August 20) was altogether
unexpected and no one was prepared for the retreat of the Greeks. When
we saw what was coming, I with others, asked the American Consul, Mr.
Horton if it would not be wise to call the American colony together and
talk over what measures we would take for self protection in case of
emergency. He called a meeting but nothing definite was agreed upon
except to report the conditions fully to the U.S. High Commission at
Constantinople. Mr. Horton asked that we all seriously consider the
situation and meet again the next day. This we did. Meanwhile I was
impressed with the utter helplessness and hopeless condition of the
refugees and approached Mr. Horton on the question of forming some sort
of American Relief organization for benefit of the refugees. He told me to
talk with some other Americans and bring the question up at our next
meeting as it was his first duty to safeguard the Americans. Naturally I
talked with my American friends at the International College, as I knew
them best, and Prof. Lawrence agreed to make the proposition after I
raised the question in the meeting. This procedure was followed and a
temporary committee formed of which Mr. Lawrence was chairman. I
made the observation also that this committee would need money and
volunteered to act as secretary in recording the subscriptions which might
be made for this purpose at the meeting. The result was that the Standard
Oil Co headed the list with 500 Turkish lira and many others followed
with subscriptions 100 and 50 liras each.
When Mr. Jacob returned several of the committees had already been
appointed. Being the only American YMCA executive in Smyrna at the
time I naturally offered the full co-operation of the YMCA in any and
every possible way we might be of service. We were taken seriously and
elected to important and responsible positions on the committees. Thus the
YMCA was represented in the active organization of the first American
Relief Committee – most of the other organizations and many American
business men of Smyrna were also represented. It was decided to use the
YMCA building as headquarters. I was appointed chairman of the
committee of Investigation and Supplies shortly afterwards. This
committee was divided into committees: Investigation, and Supplies and
Bakeries. Upon Mr. Jacob’s return, Mr. Griswold was appointed chairman
of the Committee of Supplies and Bakeries and Mr. Jacob became the
chairman of the Committee of Investigation. Being relieved of this
responsibility I became general assistant to everybody. Drove
automobiles, guarded the YMCA building, ran errands, etc.
After the Greek Army began their retreat and some time before the
occupation of Smyrna by the Turks, a certain Greek family by the name of
Marsellou offered to turn over their house, #490 on the Quay, to me, to be
used as my own for any purpose I saw fit. After asking the advice of
Consul General Horton and others I finally decided to accept the owner’s
house, providing the owner turned it over without any responsibility
whatsoever, which he agreed to do. I will show later how this house
served a very important purpose. Before the arrival of the Turkish Army,
September 9th, we were all very busy securing supplies and feeding the
refugees. As I was first appointed chairman of Investigation and Supplies,
I personally secured from General Hajanhistis, head of the Greek Army, at
the last moment supplies which he had previously refused to give us, one
item of which was 410,000 ekes of flour. Most of the material turned over
to us was done at such a late date that it was not practical or wise for us to
move it. Mr. Jaquith of the Near East Relief and Major Davis of
Constantinople Chapter of the America Red Cross arrived from
Constantinople together with Captain Hepburn, representing Admiral
Bristol, U.S. High Commissioner, just before Turkish occupation and as
they came for the purpose of effecting a more or less permanent relief
committee to cooperate with a committee they had formed in
Constantinople we gladly permitted them to assume the leadership. During
and immediately following this period of time the numbers of refugees
increased and very soon the Turkish troops arrived. There was plenty of
business for everyone.
I used my so-called house at #490 Quay for an emergency Red Cross
Hospital and we gathered the women when we found who were giving and
about to give birth into this house where we gave them the best care
circumstances permitted. We also made this a refuge for girls, many of
whom were rescued by our sailors and by many other Americans from fate
worse than death. We also gathered about 400 orphans in front of the house
and gave them bread and water and watched them by night until they were
taken to Constantinople by an American destroyer. We gathered in here
also many children left alone without protection on the streets as the result
of the death of their parents, many of whom were massacred in the
presence of their children. Many students, both from the American
Collegiate Institute and the International College, came to us for refuge. It
became evident that one house could not hold all who expected our
protection, so we also assumed the supervision of several other houses
along the Quay between ’my house’ and the house taken over as an
American Consulate after the fire.
My home being in Paradise made it necessary for me to go and come until
my family embarked, September 13, the day of the fire, on the U.S.
Destroyer Simpson for Athens. My work also took me to different parts of
the city. I, therefore, had an unusual opportunity to see and experience
many things. Meanwhile our houses on the Quay were being over-
crowded.
No one can ever describe the sensations of those days. I have seen men,
women and children whipped, robbed, shot, stabbed and drowned in the
sea. And while I helped to save many, it seemed like nothing compared
with the great need. It seems as though the awful agonizing, hopeless
shrieks for help would forever haunt me.
After the burning of Smyrna, September 13, which occurred four days after
the occupation by the Turks and two days after Mustapha Kemal himself
had entered the city, every one knew that the only salvation of the
Christians of Smyrna, including the refugees who had been successful in
reaching Smyrna before the Turkish troops overtook them, was ships and
many of them. There were others who were trying to secure ships and to
whom we looked for results in this connection, and I confined my attention
to the care of the people we had encouraged to believe we would save and
were temporarily protecting in the houses along the Quay while we
relieved the distress and hunger of the masses as much as we were able.
We were momentarily afraid that the Turks would carry out their threat to
send everyone to the interior. We therefore became more and more anxious
and determined for boats. The numbers that the Committee was able to
send away for the week that followed the first were exceedingly few
compared with the great need, but it did seem as though no ships were
available.
People everywhere were praying for ships. I also prayed for ships. I am
sure I was no more anxious for ships than the others on the committee for
that reason I did nothing towards trying to secure ships as that task was not
assigned to me nor was I asked to assist.
However, on the 20th of September (my birthday) I was seized by an
almost uncontrollable desire to find some available means of saving at
least the persons I had been responsible for gathering into ‘my house’ and
other houses on the Quay.
Asa got in his Y Chevy and drove to the headquarters in a temporary
residence of Mustafa Kemal. No decision of any consequence was made by
anyone other than the great General himself. Approval and cooperation to
remove the refugees would require the personal order of Mustafa Kemal for
the operation to proceed unimpeded.
Mustafa Kemal had people of all kinds reporting to him constantly. There
was a steady stream of people coming to see the General, and to get orders.
Mustafa Kemal certainly must have heard of the distinctive looking little
American in the white hat who had been seen all over Smyrna driving his
Chevy. Not many people had the use of a car. The hunchback made Asa very
distinctive in appearance, plus he was a dapper dresser. He was constantly
foraging for flour and fuel, plus picking up orphans and women to take them
to a safe place. Why would this man with the American colors pinned on him
risk his life time and time again to save people he did not know? Why should
he care? The city was a very dangerous place where lots of people were
being robbed, beaten and killed. And he moved through the city oblivious to
the personal risk.
Mustafa Kemal had spent a lifetime engaged in military battles. He knew a
brave person when he saw one, but a hunchback American civilian? Mustafa
Kemal had never seen or heard of this before, and was interested to see this
curious little man. So when Jennings came calling, the great General agreed
to see him. Americans, unlike all the other Allies, had never claimed Turkish
territory and had always maintained friendly relations that benefited the
Turkish people even when technically being at war with Turkey during World
War One. The conduct of the Americans was about to pay a huge dividend for
the Greeks, Armenians and Jews.
The Asa K. Jennings who walked into the Turkish army headquarters was
a hunchback. His height had been shortened 5 inches to 5’2” by Potts disease,
a form of tuberculosis that was in his lungs, throat and bowels for two years
in 1905 and 1906. Over 20 doctors had said he would die within weeks, or
perhaps a few months, but he survived for his day in service to humanity.
Well dressed in a suit, he was a diminutive little man standing before the
mighty and all-powerful Gazi Mustapha Kemal Pasha. The contrast between
the two men was stark. The Gazi controlled an army and government, and
was the symbol of strength. Little Asa did not control or have a title from any
government or organization, and had no authority or support for the proposal
he was about to make. The fact that the Gazi would even listen to this
“nobody” is startling. The fact that the Gazi agreed with the proposal, and
gave Asa a chance to perform required a huge leap of faith by the Gazi. He
was a Turk like no other, and the Turkish people today do not know of that
moment when the Gazi made the decision to turn the Turkish nation from an
imperialistic power to a nation dedicated to peace and prosperity. September
20, 1922, is a date all Turks should know as their beginning as a peaceful
nation.
The Turkish leader had a huge problem. The port was full of people who
were undesirable to the Turks. The weather was very hot. Death and
destruction were everywhere. There was no sanitation. The odor from the
rotting dead was horrific. Disease could break out at any time. The Turks
could not let this condition to continue. The Nationalist government had
announced its intention to march all these people to the interior of Turkey,
because Turkey did not have ships to deport these people. There would be no
food, water, medical or other help on the march to the interior, and all these
people would certainly die. The Gazi did not want that on his hands. He had
no options. Then came Jennings with an option.
The request was simple. Jennings wanted the opportunity to remove the
minorities from Smyrna in order to bring the fighting, killing, looting and
other violence to an end. It was time to bring peace to Turkey. It was time to
make Turkey a different place where the Turkish people would live in peace
and prosperity devoid of the violence that had been the scourge of Turkey for
so long. Kemal wanted peace for his people, and the proposal to remove the
source of violence was appealing. It would be Peace at Home and Peace in
the World. He agreed.
However, Kemal laid down some conditions.
1. No Greek flags could be displayed. Greek flags would incite violence
after all the Turks had suffered. That condition made sense.
2. No men of military age (ages 18-45) could leave Turkey, because
Kemal did not want them returning as another invading army. That was a
tragic condition, because most of those men were never seen again.
Jennings accepted this condition, because he had no choice. He was not in
a position to dictate anything to the all-powerful Turkish General. Asa’s
approach was to take what he could, and then work as best he could
around the problems.
3. No ships could tie up at the wharf. The refugees would have to be
ferried in little boats anchored in the harbor. Kemal wanted to control the
emigration so the men of military age did not leave Turkey. That condition
was relaxed, to the credit of the Turks, to allow ships to tie up at the
railroad pier to speed loading of ships. The Turks could control emigration
at the railroad pier.
4. Asa was granted only 7 days to remove the refugees, some 350,000
people, from Smyrna. The best estimate available was 300,000 Greeks
and 25,000 Armenians and 25,000 Jews. In an environment of “Turkey for
the Turks” with all the violence, anyone who was not a Muslim Turk
wanted to leave for their personal safety. That was a lot of people in a
very short number of days when Asa did not have any ships. The 7 days
was the result of the pressure on the Gazi to move these people out of the
city. As Asa left the Turkish headquarters, he must have wondered how he
could meet such an expectation. The task was daunting, but Asa K.
Jennings was, by all reports from those who knew him best, fearless,
determined and optimistic.
In 1938 Asa W. Jennings, son of AKJ, wrote to Columbia Broadcasting
System commenting on a radio program, saying:
I am quite well acquainted with what actually happened at the time, as it so
happened I was with him (AKJ) during nearly all of the period which was
the subject of your program. He also wrote: my Father was anything but a
“timid soul.” When he went into the Harbor of Smyrna with the Greek
ships it was not without knowledge on his part that the embarkation of the
refugees could be safely conducted. Prior to the time he issued his
ultimatum to the Greek Government, he (AKJ) had talked with the Turkish
High Command in Smyrna and received from them, on direct orders from
Kemal Ataturk, who died last week, assurance that the Greek ships would
be unmolested and would be permitted to take out the refugees. The reason
for the insistence of the Greek Government that my Father be on the first
Greek ship that entered the Harbor was that they doubted whether or not
the Turks would keep the promise they had previously given to my Father.
Moreover, it was not merely by chance that an American destroyer was
close by at the time he entered the Harbor of Smyrna with the first Greek
ships. That was all pre-arranged and the American destroyer was acting on
orders of Admiral Bristol. It was the same destroyer that had taken my
Father to the Island of Mitylene, from whence my Father had contacted the
Greek Government, they having made use of the radio of the Greek
battleship Kilkis.
Time was short. The grace period extended to Asa K. Jennings was 7
days. As the rescue proceeded, the rescue was well under way at the end of 7
days, but the task had not been completed. To the credit of the Turks, they
extended the deadline to 11 days so that every refugee could be removed
from Smyrna, Turkey.
During those 11 days Asa was getting requests to send ships to other ports
where people were also desperate to be saved. The Turkish government said
that the Smyrna operation must be completed first. Once all the refugees were
gone from Smyrna, then Asa was approved to proceed to other ports. Initially
Greek ships were not allowed in the Black Sea, and foreign flag ships had to
be contracted for that relief work. Later the Turks relaxed that condition so
that Greek ships could go into the Black Sea.
Getting the agreement with Mustafa Kemal was only part of the challenge.
Jennings needed ships, lots of ships. The Turks had no ships. The Greeks
were a maritime nation with lots of ships. Asa drove to the port of Smyrna
(Izmir). He later wrote to D.A. Davis of the Y in Geneva:
At this time there were three Destroyers in the Smyrna port, the Edsall,
Litchfield, and Lawrence, and I must say that the Navy crowd was
exceedingly kind in every way. In my attempts to save people from
drowning and many other of my activities, my friends of the Navy simply
let me go. I was not even restricted in giving orders. It must be
remembered, however, that we were in an extreme emergency when
anything that anyone could do to help the situation was welcomed.
I saw a large ship some distance from the Quay taking on passengers. I
asked Captain Powell of the U.S.S. Edsall for a motor boat to see whether
we could get passage for any of our special cases. He readily gave me a
boat and told me to go to the Pierre Loti and do my darndest. I found that
the ship was a French boat and had already promised passage to more
people than they could take.
The truth is the French captain did not want to get involved, and chose to
sail off with available space on the deck or someplace on the ship. AKJ was
being kind to the French by his comments.
However, some distance from the French boat, I saw a large cargo boat,
flying an Italian flag. I ordered the motor boat to take me to that ship and
discovered that the captain had not a single refugee on board and expected
to sail that afternoon direct for Constantinople. He had a few passengers,
as his ship was provided with a very few cabins. I put up the possibility of
his taking 2000 refugees and landing them at Mitylene. Many difficulties at
once presented themselves.
When the British troops were on the beach at Dunkirk, and vessels of all
kinds crossed the English Channel to bring the troops home to safety, no
captain of any vessel presented problems of any kind. This was an
emergency, and as Asa just said, people do what they can to help the
situation. So the Italian captain wants something. I add this comment so
readers understand what the Italian was thinking.
How could he get his orders changed; if so, what assurance could we give
him that the Greeks at Mitylene would let the refugees land; would the
Turkish authorities allow us to take 2000 refugees off the Quay and bring
them to his boat, and what means had we for transporting so many, etc.,
and last but not least, financially, would it be worth while to try and
overcome all these difficulties.
In short, the captain was bargaining for a bribe – known as baksheesh in
the Middle East. Such corruption is common in the Middle East.
To make the story short, we overcame all of those difficulties to the
satisfaction of the captain before the hour he was scheduled to sail, but it
was understood that we must do our best to have refugees aboard by 10:00
o’clock the next morning. However, as it was the first time we had sent so
many at one time and because of a rough sea, it took us until late afternoon
before the boat was ready to lift anchor.
Then there was another problem. The captain wanted more money. In other
words, he wanted to raise the bribe price. Asa asked “how can you ask for
more money? You have already agreed to the price.” The captain responded
that the Greeks might not let the people disembark at Mitylene, and he would
have to take the refugees to a port further away. That requires additional
money. To remove the threat of the Greeks in Mitylene denying the refugees a
place to stay, Asa said he would go on the trip, and the negotiations with the
Greeks would be his responsibility. When the ship arrived in Mitylene there
was no problem getting the people off the ship.
When I boarded the refugee ship to accompany them to Mitylene I
experienced the most humiliating sensation of my life. The boat was so
crowded I could hardly pass from the gangway to the cabin, for all along
the way the refugees pressed around me to tell me of some of their family
who were not included, to ask where more boats would come, and to ask
where they were going. They kissed my hands and my clothing and many
actually grabbed me and fell to my feet and kissed my shoes. This was too
much for me. Upon reaching my cabin I shut the door and spent some time
with my own thoughts and God.
From the interview by R.W. Abernethy for his article “The Great Rescue”
published in The Spirit of the Game by Basil Mathews, George H. Doran
Company, New York, 1926, Asa said:
I have depended on the Lord all my life, but never did I throw myself so
completely upon Him as during those days. I knew that I had begun on the
most difficult job I ever attempted, and knew how powerless I was to see
it through unless I felt that the Lord was with me all along. There in that
cabin I thanked Him for His guidance, and asked Him to continue it. He
did, as I think you will agree.
I went up on deck shortly and organized two committees, one of Armenians
and one of Greeks, to take charge of the landing of their respective groups
when we reached Mitylene. It was a slow crossing, and although the island
is only sixty miles from Smyrna, it took us nearly eight hours to get there,
and we did not reach the harbor until midnight. It was impossible to land
people then, so we delayed until seven o’clock the next morning, the 22nd.
In the interim I went ashore and organized a local committee to supervise
the landing of all refugees to be landed there.
From Smyrna I had wired to C. Calvin Davis, head of the Constantinople
Chapter of the Red Cross telling him that I had been able to secure a ship
to take 2,0000 refugees to Mitylene, and asked him to send me two wires,
one ordering me to land refugees there under the aegis of the Red Cross,
and to investigate food conditions; the other giving me official
authorization to act as I saw fit in any subsequent emergency. These wires
had been quickly forthcoming, and when at Mitylene I showed them to the
Governor General of the island he not only agreed to let us land the 2,000
refugees, but said he would take care of as many more as they could
furnish food for. This did not mean so much at the time for food conditions
were bad by reason of the fact that there were then on the island 35,000
Greek troops which had been stationed at Smyrna in addition to all the
refugees that had fled from the city before the Turkish occupation. But I
accepted his offer with thanks, and told him that I knew I could get food
from the Near East warehouses in Constantinople. This was done.
Further in the AKJ letter to D.A.Davis of the YMCA in Geneva:
Major Davis from Constantinople, chairman of the Smyrna Disaster
Committee, gave me the necessary papers and authorization to proceed to
Mitylene with 2000 refugees; and after disembarking same to inspect the
island with reference to food, clothing, housing, etc., with a view to
transporting more refugees there and report same to him in Smyrna.
Captain Powell sent a radio message to the Litchfield, which ship had left
for Constantinople, to stop at Mitylene and pick me up upon his return the
next day. We left Smyrna on the Italian ship ‘Constantinople,’ September
21st, and arrived at Mitylene about midnight. En route I met a Smyrna
business man, Mr. Ernest Aliotte, an Italian subject who was on his way to
Constantinople. Inasmuch as he spoke English and Greek, and had a clear
understanding of the circumstances, I persuaded him to stop off at Mitylene
with me, as I knew absolutely no one there, and help me manage the
situation. This he consented to do. During the night we organized
committees on the boat in order to more efficiently disembark the refugees
and provide for them temporarily afterwards. At 5:00 a.m. we went
ashore, found the harbor master, Captain Garkas, got him out of bed,
accepted his and Aliotte’s recommendation of other men who might serve
on an emergency relief committee, called on them and by 7:00 o’clock the
doctor had visited the ship. We had secured permission to land the
refugees at Mityene and had actually begun work.
In his report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine AKJ commented:
What interested me most was that in the harbor at Mitylene there were
twenty empty Greek ships. The cries that went up from the refugees on
board this Italian boat when we arrived there and saw these twenty ships
cannot be described. Knowing that their relatives and friends and
compatriots were still in Smyrna, and contrasting that situation with their
own escape, they thronged the government headquarters and urged that
these ships be released. And they found that I was calling upon the military
governor for the same purpose.
When the ship arrived at Mitylene Asa was surprised to see many Greek
soldiers and ships at anchor. When he inquired he found the soldiers had
come from Smyrna, and the ships were under the control of General Frangos.
Continuing with this report to D.A. Davis of the YMCA:
At this time there were over 35,000 Greek soldiers on the island, as this
was before the revolution. (The revolution was the coup of the King
several days later.) Several refugees were already there, many having
come before the arrival of Kemal’s army in Smyrna. We found the island in
great need of flour, as at that time no more than three days supply was in
sight. We were most fortunate in securing as members of our committee a
former British officer, Percifal Hodkinson, a prominent business man from
Smyrna who, with his family had been spending his vacation in Mitylene,
and Captain Panos Argyropoulos, a former naval officer under previous
Venizelos government and who knew shipping from A to Z.
We met the governor-general of the island, Gr. Spilisopoulos, the
Commander-in-Chief of the South Army, General Frangos; the Mayor of
the city, Mr. Pospaskinay, and reviewed the situation with reference to the
immediate needs of the island and the prospect of bringing more refugees
to Mitylene. It was agreed to use the island of Mitylene as temporary
refugee station, providing arrangements could be made to bring them as it
is nearest to Smyrna. Housing problem was not a serious one as the
weather was very fine and any place would be better than on the Quay at
Smyrna. With reference to the food question, I assured them that the
American Relief Committee would provide an emergency flour relief if
necessary. I raised the question of necessity for so many soldiers on the
island and they assured me that it was because of the rapid evacuation of
Smyrna and that the government would take immediate steps to transport
its troops elsewhere. We then took up the serious question of
transportation.
As a result of the rapid advance of the Turkish troops and quick get-away
of Greek troops from Smyrna, most of the ships which had been in Smyrna
Bay had been taken to Mitylene and were still there. When the refugees
saw all these ships in Mitylene harbor they came to us crying and pleading
that these ships be sent to Smyrna at once.
General Frangos admitted the boats in the harbor were under his control
and direction as all had been commandeered by the Greek Government. He
intended to use some of these in sending away part of the Greek Army but
for some reason they were not leaving. We found out afterward that it was
because of the plans of the revolutionary party and only two days from that
time every soldier went over to the so-called Venizelos Government, as it
was at Mitylene that the plans for the revolution were executed and first
became effective.
General Frangos was part of a group of military officers planning a coup
of King Constantine. Gaining power was the primary objective rather than
saving some 300,000 Greeks, plus others, at imminent risk of death at the
hands of the Turks. This is the corruption of Greece. The leaders claim to be
Christians, but do not follow the teachings of Jesus Christ. And where were
the leaders of the Greek Orthodox Church?
I asked why, if General Frangos had power to give us boats he could not
let us have those under his authority to bring refugees from Smyrna. He
said it would give him great pleasure to do so but that they feared the boats
would never return. I asked him if he would give the boats if we could
assure him the boats would not be molested by the Turks. He replied in the
affirmative. I asked him how many he could let us have under those
conditions, and he replied six of the smaller type boats in the harbor. I
asked for the larger ones also, but he insisted they were for the troops.
I did not carry the question any further.
Of course they were for the troops, that is, the troops to over throw the
King. The response by the General was the characteristic duplicity of
Byzantine negotiators who the Greeks have learned to imitate. The response
did not address the immediate need to save the lives of Greek citizens.
Asa Jennings left that meeting fuming. He knew that the General controlled
the ships, and therefore the lives of Greek citizens, but for unknown reasons
would not come to the aid of the Greek citizens. Asa knew that the General
did not act as one would expect in these circumstances. There had to be an
unknown reason. It was only later after the coup that Asa understood why the
General was being devious, dishonest and resistive.
Captain Rhodes of the Litchfield arrived at Mitylene in the later afternoon,
September 22, from Constantinople, to take me back to Smyrna. I had not
finished all tentative preparations, so he very kindly waited for me. En
route Smyrna, my report was sent by radio to Captain Powell of the
Edsall, Senior Officer Present. Davis had returned to Constantinople
during the day. By the time we reached Smyrna, Captain Powell had
reached an agreement with the Turkish authorities with reference to bring
in Greek ships, and before we dropped anchor boarded the Litchfield with
permission to bring in ships not flying Greek flag for purpose of
transporting refugees.
All major decisions by the Nationalist Government of Turkey were by
Mustafa Kemal himself. He had previously approved the removal of the
refugees, and the order was confirmed through his ranks.
After a brief conference, Captain Powell ordered the Litchfield to take me
back to Mitylene full speed and instructed me to bring in the ships and he
would make preparations to have them loaded with refugees.
It was necessary for me to have an order in my hand for the ships which I
could show to the authorities at Mitylene.
Can you imagine such a requirement during a crisis with so many lives at
risk? This was another devious stall by the powers hoping to derail Jennings
so the coup could go forward unimpeded. However, Jennings had no choice
but to work through the objections.
Captain Rhodes and I quickly reached an agreement and he signed the
following order:
U.S.S. LITCHFIELD (336)
Smyrna, Asia Minor
September 22, 1922
A.K. Jennings
American Relief Committee
Mitylene, Greece
Sir:
In accordance with orders received at Smyrna from Captain H. Powell,
Senior Naval Officer, U.S. Navy (U.S.S. EDSALL), the ships at Mitylene are
ordered to proceed to Smyrna for the purpose of transporting refugees to
Mitylene. Ships will not be molested in any way, providing they do not fly
Greek flag or tie up at the quay or pier. If desirable, ships can be escorted in
and out harbor. If possible send U.S.S. Edsall radio call when ships leave
Mitylene for Smyrna. Flour is on the way to Mitylene.
J. B. Rhodes
Lieutenant-Commander, U.S. Navy
Commanding U.S.S. LITCHFIELD
The Litchfield wired the Sulferino, an Italian Destroyer in the port of
Mitylene, to send a small boat to take me ashore immediately on arrival,
which they did so that the Litchfield could proceed at once to
Constantinople. Immediately after landing, which was about 1:30 a.m., I
called members of our emergency committee, Captain Panos
Argyropoulos, Captain Percival Hodkinson, Errnest Aliotte, and the
harbor master, Captain Garkas, and together we called upon the military
governor, General Bakas, and the Commander-in-Chief of the South Army,
General Frangos, who had conditionally promised us the six small ships.
In spite of our order and assurance we found him unwilling to trust the
ships to us until he could communicate with the government at Athens and
he could not give us even a good guess as to when we might expect a
favorable reply. Needless to say, we put all the pressure on him we could
and he promised to do his best.
These are Byzantine negotiating tactics. Delay, mis-direct, and change
prior commitments. Lives hang in the balance. The clock is ticking down to
the limit allowed by General Mustafa Kemal. The conduct of General
Frangos was dishonorable to his compatriots.
After leaving him we decided to visit the Greek battleship Kilkis (old
U.S.S. Mississippi) which fortunately was at that time in Mitylene harbor,
and put the proposition to the Commander, Captain Theofanides, in order
that we might secure his cooperation and if possible use his radio in order
to get in direct and immediate touch with the Greek government. We found
him most receptive and anxious to do all within his power, offering to
communicate in code, any messages we might wish to send to the
government. We gladly availed ourselves of this opportunity, as every
moment was precious, the Turkish authorities having given only the last
day of September to evacuate all the refugees except men between 18 and
45 from Smyrna – not permitting the refugees to leave any other Asia
Minor port until Smyrna was evacuated. We addressed our
communications to the Prime Minister direct.
The first message written by Asa K. Jennings appears below in his
handwriting on a radio message form of the Kilkis.
Asa K. Jennings handwritten radio message
to the Prime Minister of Greece
This message written in English was then translated into Greek by Captain
I. Theofanides. This also is an exact copy.
Radio Message Written in Greek by Captain I. Theofanides
Following is an English translation of the message written by Captain
Theofanides. When read carefully, this shows the Captain was attempting to
make the message of Asa K. Jennings more forceful. Captain I. Theofanides
was now a principal partner in the rescue of thousands of Greeks and other
Christians and Jews.
Radio Message of Captain Theofanides Written in English
The message as written by Captain Theofanides was then taken to the
radio room on the Kilkis. The message was put into code, and then
transmitted by radio to Athens. Continuing with the report from Asa K.
Jennings to his superior D.A. Davis of the International YMCA in Geneva:
We were told to wait as it was too early in the morning to do business. We
replied that we demanded a meeting of the cabinet at once or we would
wire our request and reasons for doing so quite open, not using code.
As Admiral “Dannys” Theofanides, Grandson of Captain I. Theofanides,
told me in Athens in 2013 such a threat issued to the Government would
never have been allowed by the captain of a Greek ship, unless Captain I.
Theofanides agreed with the threat. Again, the Captain showed he was a
partner, and by allowing such an aggressive act, he was putting his own
career in the Greek Navy at risk. The Captain obviously cared more about
the Greek people at risk.
Photo of Captain I. Theofanides
From “The Great Rescue” interview as recorded by R.W. Abernethy:
This was about four o’clock in the morning, so I didn’t expect a reply for a
little time, but soon one came demanding to know who I was. Now that
was a very natural query. I had been in that part of the world only about a
month, and no one had ever heard of me. So I cabled back that I was in
charge of the American Relief at Mitylene. And I was. I didn’t explain
however, that I held the position solely by virtue of the fact that I was the
only American there!
From the Mrs. Emmons Blaine report:
We were promised a meeting of the cabinet at earliest possible moment
when our request would be given serious consideration. We demanded all
the ships in the Mitylene harbor and also all available ships at Piraeus.
Many were the messages exchanged between us and the government. It
must be borne in mind that it was still the Royalist or Constitutionalist
Government, as the revolution did not take place until some days later.
They insisted we guarantee their protection for their ships.
The Government was afraid the Turks would capture the Greek ships and
invade the Greek islands.
We would not agree to go any further than the orders and instructions we
had received, but assured them that an American Destroyer would escort
their ships into and out of the Smyrna harbor and that American officers
and sailors would assist in loading the refugees. They asked if an
American would also travel with the ships and I promised them that I
would travel with the first ship and remain aboard during the loading of
refugees and direct the loading of the others.
The Greek Government thought the Turks would sink the first Greek ship to
enter the port of Smyrna, and that would be the end of this pesky Jennings.
The Greek government was driving at the question of whether the U.S. Navy
would defend the Greek ships with American guns in the event the Turks
attempted to take control of the Greek ships. The question was “Does it mean
that American destroyers will protect the ships if the Turks attempt to take
them?” Asa had never discussed all the possibilities with Commander
Powell.
My patience was beginning to run dry, too, so I wired the Greek
Government that there wasn’t time to go into details of how we were going
to protect Greek ships. I said that the Commander of the American
destroyer squadron at Smyrna had given his guarantee that protection
would be offered all Greek ships, and I asked them if anything could be
more satisfactory!
In his report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine, AKJ provides further insight:
I found afterwards the reason they asked that I enter the port of Smyrna
with the first Greek ship going in for the refugees was that if anything
happened they could show that the Americans had led them into a trap. But
fortunately nothing happened, and the Turks kept their word.
Continuing with the letter to D.A. Davis:
All these wireless communications took time. The Captain of the Kilkis
insisted for me that the government give us an immediate answer or tell us
when we might expect one.
The Captain established himself in history as the hero of the Greek people.
Finally we agreed to serve them an ultimatum, allowing them until 6:00
P.M. to give us a favorable reply. We further told them if they did not
acknowledge receipt of our ultimatum we would wire them quite open so
that anyone could pick up the message, for we had thus far been using the
code for all messages.
Captain I. Theofanides had to approve that message being sent.
Blackmail by a Methodist minister!
We immediately received word that the ultimatum had been received and
that we might expect an answer. In this ultimatum we showed them the
sympathy of the world would be with the Turks and that no amount of
explaining would ever justify the Greek Government for not permitting the
Americans to assist them evacuate their own nationals when the lives of
thousands depended upon the Greek Government furnishing the ships and
accepting any possible risk of their being captured by the Turks, since
highest Turkish authorities in Smyrna had granted permission to Americans
to bring the Greek ships into Smyrna Bay, provided they did not fly the
Greek flag or tie up at the quay or pier.
There was only one “highest Turkish authority” and that was Mustafa
Kemal himself. He would never have delegated such an important decision,
and no person on his staff would consider making such an important decision.
Kemal was revered by all Turks as the sole authority, a benevolent dictator,
if you like.
We assured them if they would not give their ships that the American
Relief Committee after using the few ships already chartered would wash
their hands of the whole affair and put the responsibility upon the Greek
nation and tell the reason to the world.
Blackmail again!
Asa K. Jennings then sent the following radio message to Captain Powell
of the U.S. Navy in Smyrna. NUPM is the call sign of the destroyer that
Captain Power commanded.
Radio Message Jennings to Captain Powell 12 Ships
Before expiration of time limit given in our ultimatum we received word
that all Greek and government owned ships in Piraeus harbor had been
ordered to Mitylene to be placed under our command. At the same time,
General Frangos who was responsible for Greek ships in Mitylene harbor,
was ordered to turn same over to us at once.
Asa Jennings then sent the following radio message to the Greek
Government in Athens:
Mr. Jennings on behalf of American Relief Committee gratefully
appreciates the Hellenic Government’s prompt cooperation in connection
with the transport of the Smyrna refugees.
Radio Message from Rear Admiral Kalamidus
Then Asa Jennings received the following radio message from General
Frangos. The message is written by the hand of Asa Jennings on a radio
message form of the Kilkis. A typed copy is provided to make reading easier.
Frangos Acknowledges All Ships
Captain Theofanides of the Kilkis immediately called all of the captains of
ships in harbor to his battleship. They were given orders that they and their
ships were all under my command and were asked how many could be
ready to proceed to Smyrna by 12:00 midnight. There were many excuses;
finally 10 ships agreed to be ready.
Admiral “Dannys” Theofanides in Athens in 2013 reported that the ship
captains were afraid to enter a Turkish port, and thus the reason for the
excuses. The Admiral then said that his Grandfather told the captains that any
ship not ready to sail by midnight would see its captain face a court martial
(confirmed in notes left by AKJ) followed by a firing squad on the fantail of
the Kilkis. Suddenly, the captains said their ships would be able to make the
voyage. Captain I. Theofanides is the hero of the Greek people, but
unfortunately, the Greek people do not know of his heroism.
AKJ was on the lead ship, the Ismini. He had the Greek flag lowered, and
the American flag raised as this ship was now under the command of an
American. With a line of more ships following behind, the refugees referred
to AKJ as Admiral, although he never received any such appointment from
the Greeks or U.S. Continuing with the Asa K. Jennings report to D.A. Davis
of the YMCA in Geneva:
On the morning of September 23rd, the American Destroyer Lawrence,
under the command of Captain Wolleson, met us some distance outside of
Smyrna Bay and escorted us to anchorage. The sight of so many boats
coming into harbor at one time produced a great sensation among the
refugees. Captain Powell, Senior Naval Officer Present, Smyrna, soon
arranged for a certain number of boats to dock at the end of the Aidin
railroad pier, under supervision of Turkish authorities but assisted by
American officers and sailors. I directed the ships.
Several barriers or gates guarded by the Turkish officers and soldiers
were arranged by the Turkish authorities, beginning on the quay and
continuing until almost the end of the long railroad pier. On the quay and
along this pier, the victims of the Smyrna tragedy were made to pass
before they could embark on ships we had brought in for that purpose and
there they were examined, searched and robbed; many were most cruelly
treated and all men between the ages of 18 and 45 (many 15 and 60)
arrested and taken to prison unless they could prove they were foreign
subjects. As many of the naturalized foreign subjects had their papers
forcibly taken from them, including Americans, they could not prove their
rightful contention and were led away with the others. Some of these,
especially Americans, because of their faithful work of the American Vice
Consul Maynard Barnes (remember, the Consul George Horton had run for
his life on September 13), and members of the American Relief
Committee, were afterward released.
Captain Panos Appointed
USN Carrying a Refugee on Stretcher
Men to be Taken to Interior on Railroad Pier
From the report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine:
Every day more ships came. All available sailors were released for
service. Every American, and others as well, devoted their utmost effort
and worked night and day until during the last week before the 30th of
September, the date set by the Turks when the refugees must either return to
the interior or have left for other parts, the evacuation was completed.
Further from the AKJ report to D.A. Davis of the YMCA:
The second day our boats from Piraeus arrived and the next day we led in
17 ships. From this time until the expiration of the time limit we had
between 40 and 50 ships under our command operating between Smyrna
and Mitylene and other ports on the island and mainland of Greece. Some
boats, like the Magalia Hallas, we did not send into the Smyrna harbor, but
transferred refugees to these larger boats after leaving Smyrna and sent
them to such ports as Salonika, Piraeus, Patras, etc.
After bringing more than 200,000 refugees through Mitylene and 80,000
through Chios, we found it necessary to send many direct to other islands
and to the mainland of Greece from Smyrna. We were able to do this and
to re-distribute the surplus at Mitylene and Chios and other islands after
the government furnished us a list of various ports together with the
possible number they could care for.
We were greatly handicapped on account of the revolution which began
first to function at Mitylene and occurred only two days after we had
received the order from the Royalist Government giving us the ships.
Wouldn’t you think the coup could have been delayed until after the rescue
mission? The revolution at this critical time shows the priorities of the
leaders to be personal rather than humanitarian. That has been a constant
problem in Greece since its liberation from the Ottoman Turks.
As soon as the revolutionary government came into power at Mitylene, we
at once visited the new authorities and asked for a ratification of the
previous government’s action, in assigning us ships, etc. This they did
without hesitation.
At this point, the rescue operation was wildly popular. Jennings was well
known among the Greek people. There is no way the new Government could
have stopped the continuing rescue operation without a violent reaction
against the new Government.
Asa K. Jennings in Mitylene
For a short period (about five days) we were operating under two
governments, the revolutionary government at Mitylene and the Royalist
government at Athens. If the Americans had not secured the ships when
they did and insisted on having a free hand to operate same, shipping
would have been paralyzed during this critical period. As it was however,
we were able to complete the evacuation of Smyrna within six hours of the
expiration of the time limit.
The original time limit of 7 days had been extended by the Turks to 11
days to get all the refugees out of Smyrna.
The American Relief Committee at Smyrna had asked the privilege of
taking refugees from other points on the Asia Minor coast; also, before the
expiration of time limit; but were told by Turkish authorities that positively
no other points could be evacuated until Smyrna had been completed. The
Committee, not sure that Smyrna could be cleared by date set, which was
midnight, September 30th, asked for an extension of time limit. Finally, on
the afternoon of the last day, an extension of eight days was granted, which
time allowed for the evacuation of the smaller towns along the Asia Minor
coast of the Archipelago.
In many of these towns, notably Aivili, Dekili, Pergamos, and inland
towns, surrounding the Gulf of Adrinide, sincere agreements were made
between the Turkish and Greek inhabitants that they would continue to live
together after the Turkish occupation, in harmony, each respecting the
rights of the other as before. The Turkish population, through their leaders,
made public pledges to this effect, and the Christian population through
their leaders, publicly accepted, swearing by the Koran and the Bible
respectively.
This accounts for the small exodus of Christian population before the
arrival of Turkish troops, although they had plenty of time to get away after
the capture of Smyrna. A good example is Aivali, where our Destroyer
McLeish, under command of Captain Ellis, arrived with the American
Consul, Oscar Heiser on board. They were told by the Turkish
commandant then in charge and also by the Greek metropolitan,
supposedly representing the Christian population, that the Christians did
not care to leave.
The Americans under escort of Turkish authorities, made a brief survey of
the town and found everything in full swing, with all the business places in
operation, except the wine shops, which the Turkish authorities declared
they had closed, and this was the report that Captain Ellis sent to the
Senior Naval Officer Present at Smyrna. I was not satisfied with this
report, as I had been talking with men who had come from there and knew
that many desired to leave and that probably the Greek metropolitan did
not speak his real mind.
Subsequent events disclosed the fact that many Christians did wish to
leave, and later as many as could get to the ships, numbering about 15 to
18,000 did leave, when boats were escorted to Aivali for that purpose,
under supervision of Captain Ellis. So the refugees had been tricked by the
Turks with the help of the Greek metropolitan. That gave the Turks the
opportunity to weed out the men of military age so they would not return in
the future as another invading army.
Men of military age were arrested and sent to jail. Many families,
however, after being separated from fathers, husbands, brothers, were sent
into the interior, without any opportunity to leave whatsoever. Some of the
same refugees who have been deported in the interior from Smyrna and
nearby towns have appeared in Samsun and also Mersin for embarkation.
Most of their numbers, however, perished.
Samsun is about 525 miles away, and Mersin is about 473 miles away
(761 km).
All the above quotations are from the report dated April 8, 1923, of Asa
K. Jennings submitted to D. A. Davis of the YMCA in Geneva.
After the rescue was completed, AKJ was asked by R.W. Abernethy what
one incident that moved him most deeply. He replied:
I was out here one afternoon on a destroyer, just about where the ship is
riding now, when I heard a cry from the water below, and looking over the
rail saw a little fellow swimming by the side of the ship. How he had
eluded the bullets of Turkish rifles I do not know; but there he was, and
nearly exhausted from his swim. He caught sight of me and begged
piteously for help. I called to some of the boys on the ship to help me let
down a rope and draw him up. We finally got the little chap on deck, and
discovered that he was an Armenian. He could speak only a little English,
but he didn’t have to use that to tell us that he was cold. He had no clothes,
and had evidently been in the water some time. One of the sailors got an
old pair of trousers and wrapped the boy up in them. I say ‘wrapped’ for
they were large enough to be coat and trousers both for him. I knew that we
had better put him in some more or less obscure place for the time being,
so motioned to him to crawl back behind one of the boats. He did so, and
was so exhausted that, warmed by the wrap we had given him, he
immediately went to sleep.
It was not long after that I heard a commotion on the other side of the deck,
and hurried over to see some of the boys pointing to a young girl
swimming a few yards from the ship. She, too, in some miraculous way,
had eluded the bullets that had meant to check her flight, but it was
apparent that unless help reached her soon she would sink. It so happened
that one of the boats was moored alongside, and two or three of the boys
jumped into it and rowed out to her. Now, it was against our agreement to
load refugees except at the wharf, and no officer was permitted to allow it.
As I stood watching those boys row out to rescue the girl, I caught sight out
of the corner of my eye of one of the officers coming our way. I watched to
see what would happen. He took in the situation instantly, and as quickly
turned and walked away. Officially he had observed nothing; personally he
had seen enough to realize that a life was being saved, and he had no wish
to prevent it.
The boat reached the girl in time, and the boys drew her to safety. She was
so exhausted from the ordeal that she fainted dead away, and had to be
carried up on deck. She appeared to be about seventeen or eighteen years
old, evidently one of those who had suffered most in the horrors of the past
few days, for she looked pale and thin, and was thoroughly chilled from
lack of proper clothing and from the long swim. We got some blankets and
wrapped her up in them, and she finally revived.
She looked at us with a wild expression in her eyes, seeing all these men
standing about her, and we read horror and nameless dread in her face.
Finally, however, she realized that she was safe and in the hands of friends
who would protect her, and such a look of joy and thankfulness came over
her face as I shall never forget. Then thoughts of what she had been through
gripped her, for she began to cry, calling out some name in her grief. We
were helpless, for we could not understand a word of what she was
saying. We gathered, however, that she was calling the name of someone
whom she had been forced to leave. I then bethought me of the little fellow
I had sequestered behind the boat, and hurried back to my stowaway to see
if he could help us with his Armenian and his few words of English. I
found him curled up on a sleep of sheer exhaustion, perfectly oblivious to
the tragedies that were going on all around him. I gently shook him, telling
him to come with me a moment. He got up and took my hand, and together
we made our way toward the group standing about the frightened grief-torn
girl. As we approached, the ring parted, and we could see the girl lying on
the deck.
Suddenly I felt the hand in mine tighten, and heard a sharp intake of breath.
A moment later, with a wild, fluttering cry, the little fellow bounded from
my side and threw himself on the girl. Startled from her sobbing she sat up,
fixing frightened eyes on the boy. Then from her lips there burst the name
that had been moaned in grief before, but now cried out in tones of such
frenzied joy that there was no doubt in our minds but that my little
stowaway was the one she had been calling for all along. He was her
brother, and there on the deck of that ship, all unconsciously, we had
reunited them. One or two storm-hardened, weather-beaten, globe-traveled
‘gobs’ turned and left the group, their eyes brimming with tears, a sort of
primitive shame driving them to conceal their emotions. They needn’t have
slunk away. Every man of us there had a lump in his throat and tears in his
eyes. Gradually, however, we all tip-toed away, leaving the happy pair to
share together a joy little known in that harbor. I managed the next day to
put them on a ship bound for Athens, and later when I got there I looked
them up, and have seen them two or three times since.
THE PLIGHT OF THE REFUGEES
A
fter the rescue at Smyrna had been completed, and the effort to save
hundreds of thousands of people from other ports of Turkey was well under
way, the attention of the relief workers turned to the Greeks, Armenians and
Jews spread over the various parts of Greece. The refugees were safe from
an attacking army, but at great risk of starvation and disease.
Embarking Refugees from Mitylene
Photos of Tent City and People Walking Over Hill
Asa W. Jennings Facing Camera Taking Refugees to Salonika, Greece
Rev. Jennings Still in Greece
By the Chateauguay Record. The following article was recently printed in
the Paris edition of the New York Herald, and was written from an interview
given by A.K. Jennings at Constantinople.
Scourges Sweep Scutary Refugees Living In Stables – Ottoman Greeks
Die by Hundreds in Filth and Squalor as Babies Are Born.
Constantinople – While the dead are being carried out, children are being
brought into the world whose mothers pray that the young lives will be taken
before their offspring have time to die from starvation in filthy stables at
Scutari, where 10,000 Ottoman Greeks are living in the most abject
wretchedness that has been seen in the Near East.
Three thousand of the 10,000 refugees who were brought recently from
Trebizond, on the Black Sea, are living in two stables, through the leaky
roofs of which the rain pours, making mud of the dirt floors. Two hundred
and ninety-seven persons in those two stables have died from smallpox and
typhus during the past seven days lying wrapped in blankets or rugs for a day
or even longer before their neighbors realize that they have passed away –
and all the time the living cook their meager meals over open fires at the side
of the corpses.
Such is the condition of the refugee camp at Scutari, so infinitely bad that
the British High Commissioner sent a member of his staff to investigate,
while the Near East Relief is rushing food and medical supplies. The
condition of these refugees is a menace to the health of Constantinople.
It is certain that hundreds of these refugees are doomed to die in the near
future despite all that can now be done to save them.
A.K. Jennings, who did much for the refugees in Smyrna at the time of the
fire last September, visited the camp and was appalled at the conditions of
life and the suffering. When he returned here from a full day spent on
investigation, he said:
People who were a few weeks ago prosperous peasants in Anatolia are
now living in conditions of filth and disease which would kill the most
hardy animals. Those fortunate enough to have saved something in the
flight from their homes spread a rug to sit upon. Ninety percent are old
men, women and children, and have only the clothes they are wearing.
Here with stray copper cooking utensils, the mother cooks a scanty meal
beside her children who search their bodies for vermin. The most
elementary principles of sanitation and privacy are lacking, the stench is
overwhelming. People wrapped in bundles of rags are dead for days
before those living beside them know it. Above the noisy rabble arises the
voice of the village priest praying over the dead. In parts of stables
children are being brought into the world while their mothers are crying to
God to take them.
The date of this interview was last December. Have just found the
translation so am sending it on A.K.J.
Then, there was another newspaper account that describes the horror faced
by the refugees.
Extract from the daily paper, ‘Amalphela of Smyrna,’ now published in
Athens. Oldest daily newspaper in Greece.
During the past few days there has been in Athens the American
philanthropist, Asa K. Jennings, who supervised the evacuation of
Smyrna, and succeeded through his personal intervention in persuading
the Turks (that is, he went personally to Mustafa Kemal) to permit Greek
ships to proceed into Kemalist waters and transport thousands of exiles
who were massed on the seashore, to safety in Greece. Subsequently he
helped in the rescue of 67,000 refugees from the Pontus, who were
scattered all along the shores of the Black Sea. He also saved thousands of
orphans from Ordou, and with American steamers transferred them to
Greece.
Mr. Jennings received our representative and consented to speak to our
readers of his great philanthropic work. We met Mr. Jennings in his
drawing room, which he uses also as his office, in the hotel Grande
Gretagne. We found him studying a series of maps of Greece, the Pontus
and Asia Minor. With red ink, he was marking the different places where,
in deplorable condition, the refugees are now collected. He was deep in
arrangements and plans for the future care of the present refugees and for
those who are on the way from the Black Sea coast. He was studying the
routes by which thousands of destitute refugees are trying to escape.
“How many thousands of refugees are still waiting along the shores of the
Pontus,” we asked Mr. Jennings.
He replied: On the coast there are at present about twenty thousand of
which 3,000 are at Samsoun, 5,000 in Kerasoun, 2,000 in Ordou, 2,000 in
Trebizond, and the remainder 8,000, at various other points of the coast, in an
awful condition, destitutes and nearly naked. In the interior of Asia Minor
there are still to be found about 150,000 refugees, who are mostly on the
march to the coast. I am now working for the transport of these unfortunates,
as well as for many orphans who are now mingled with the refugees on the
march. The number of these orphans is still unknown, but is very large. The
Greek Government, however, has decided not to receive for the present any
more refugees, as there is no immediate prospect of housing them or feeding
then. The whole situation is very difficult. This decision cannot stand long
for these refugees are running the risk of being sent back to the interior of
Asia Minor if ships are not ready to take them away when they reach the
coast. They are certain to die through exposure, cold and privations. My
reading of the situation I am sending to Mr. Doxiades, Minister of Public
Assistance, and I hope to succeed in arranging some method of bringing away
to safety these destitute and downtrodden people. As soon as the government
makes room for these people, we will undertake the transport and feeding of
all of them en route. The American Near East Relief is cooperating in this
work. It is expected that the refugees now in Syria will remain there until
spring as they are in no danger.
The reporter asked, ‘You declared that you are principally interested in the
orphans? Is it possible for you to supply us with some information
concerning their future?’
I have taken the responsibility of rescuing and transporting to Greece all
the Pontus orphans, replied Mr. Jennings. They will be established here in
provisional orphanages at the expense of the American Near East Relief. As
regards the future education and support of these children, the American
nation will take care of them through Major C. D. Morris, Director, Near
East Relief, who is in direct touch with the Greek Government in regard to
this matter of future education and support. You can obtain from him all the
further information you may desire.
Jennings, it was reported, was planning to leave shortly for Smyrna.
’Yes,’ said Mr. Jennings, ‘but I would prefer that should not ask me the
object of my voyage. I can only say this much, that important negotiations
are now under way concerning the release of all political and military
prisoners. I hope that these negotiations will succeed. The release of the
prisoners, or better still the exchange between Greece and Turkey is in
charge of the American YMCA, and this Association is carrying on
separate negotiations for all matters regarding the welfare of prisoners. Its
work is entirely separate from the official work of the Lausanne
conference. As for my own part in this work, I shall do all in my power to
enable this exchange to begin at the earliest possible date.
“What can you say of the relations between America and Greece, and your
impressions of the present situation in Greece,’ asked the reporter.
‘I am very much pleased with the efforts which Greece is making,’ said
Mr. Jennings. ‘The Government has undertaken faithfully and honorably the
work of the present difficult times in Greece. I have observed with
pleasure that the Greek people have accepted with confidence their new
government. Otherwise, I could not have shown the interest which I am
now showing in the refugee work. And I can also say that the American
nation desires to help Greece, and that relations between the two countries
will be strengthened in the future by the bonds of sympathy which are now
being established.’
From the report Asa K. Jennings wrote on April 8, 1923, to D. A. Davis of
the YMCA in Geneva:
After the evacuation of Smyrna and other nearby coast towns, I went to
Athens to interview the new revolutionary government with reference to
further distribution of refugees and their care. While directing the shipping
from Mitylene I had also organized a relief committee. The Near East
Relief and American Women’s Hospital and the YMCA had sent
representatives there. Doctor M. E. Elliott, the director of the AWH
(American Women’s Hospital). came personally as the need at Mitylene at
that time was considered greatest of all. Dr. Elliott accompanied me on my
trip to Athens to interview the government.
The government urged us to make our headquarters, Athens, and referred to
us a call for help that had come from Nakri and Adalia. The YMCA at
Athens had first received the appeal but the government could offer no
solution. I promised the government that if they would send ships I would
ask our Navy if we could not send Destroyers to escort them into the
Turkish ports. On these conditions the Greek government prepared three
ships, and I asked the SNO (Senior Naval Officer). at Smyrna, to have a
Destroyer meet them off the port of Rhodes. This was done.
Later on we received calls for help from Mersin and the necessity for a
Destroyer to be located at both Athens and Mersin seemed apparent if we
were to keep in touch with the situation and continue our service in
connection with the evacuation of refugees. This was the intention of
Admiral Bristol, so he ordered a Destroyer stationed at these ports as well
as at Smyrna.
He also especially requested that I continue my activities in the Near East
and so requested your office. After we had ships and Destroyers caring for
the refugees calling to us from Southern Anatolian Coast, we also received
calls from the Black Sea. The Greek government asked me what we could
do to assist them there.
I made a trip to Constantinople and decided after a talk with Admiral
Bristol and others to take Greek ships to Constantinople and if possible
secure consent of the Turkish government to take them through into the
Black Sea. Failing in that, load them with refugees who had already come
down from Pontus and were waiting for ships. We brought these ships to
Constantinople, but the Turks refused to allow them to proceed to the
Black Sea. So we secured ships under British flag, which the Greek
government chartered and I accompanied in order to bring away the most
needy cases. Meanwhile the Pontus refugees in Constantinople were
embarked.
The Navy had sometimes two and three Destroyers in the Black Sea in
order to help relieve the situation. We afterwards did secure consent from
Turkish authorities to take Greek ships, escorted by American Destroyers
into the Black Sea, but unfortunately the Greek government had changed
their attitude with reference to receiving any more refugees from Asa
Minor, and insisted on the Turks keeping them as they, the Greeks, claimed
they had received already more than one million refugees since the Smyrna
disaster, an increase of 20% of their population, and that it was impossible
for them to receive more.
As the American Red Cross was assisting in the feeding in Greece, so they
asked the Near East Relief to feed and care for the needy refugees in
Turkey, and looked to us to see that the refugees were not molested. In all
this endeavor, the American Navy has been giving the closest sort of
cooperation as I have shown. Whatever I have been able to do has been
due almost entirely to the Navy, of whom I have never yet made a request
that has not been granted.
The story of the conditions of the refugees is another story, as is also that
of the exchange of prisoners and their condition. At the present time I am
assisting the commission for the exchange of Turkish and Greek prisoners
in which again the Navy is highly cooperative.
The Turkish government offered to give the Greeks one Greek prisoner of
war (POW) for each Turk who was a POW of the Greeks. The problem was
Turkey had lots of Greeks as POWs, but Greece had few Turks as POWs.
Asa simply agreed. He knew that trying to bargain or argue with the Turks
would only annoy them and not produce any positive results. They dig their
heels in like they are defending Gallipoli again. That has been part of the
Turkish persona until today. Instead, again Asa relied on the U.S. Navy. He
had the Navy transport the Greeks who were POWs to Greece and the Turks
who were POWs to Turkey in such a way that the Turkish government could
not keep count.
The commission has told both the Greek and Turkish authorities that they
owe a great deal to our assistance and the cooperation of our Navy. I might
add that personally I have always been used exceedingly well by the
Turkish authorities whenever it has been necessary for me to return to
Turkey, which has been several times since the occupation of Smyrna. It is
needless to say that the Greek government has been especially courteous to
me. It has been my plan to work in close cooperation with the American
Red Cross, Near East Relief, American Women’s Hospital, and other
organizations, as well as the Turkish and Greek governments. Unofficially,
representing our own government, and officially, the International
Committee of the YMCA
The Turkish government cooperated, because those were the instructions
of Mustafa Kemal. His objective of “Turkey for the Turks” was being
achieved. The Greeks cooperated, despite all the political turmoil, because
of the enormous popularity of Asa K. Jennings in Greece. Others like Rear
Admiral Mark Bristol, Consul General George Horton, and the head of the
American’s Women’s Hospital tried to take credit for the rescue, but the
Greek people knew differently.
Asa K. Jennings was very distinctive in appearance due to the hunchback,
mode of dress and hat. Wherever he went, people knew who he was. When
he walked down the streets of Greece people would kneel as he approached
as though the Host was being brought down the street. People wanted to kiss
his hand and feet. They were grateful for being saved. Asa, a humble man,
was embarrassed.
On March 12, 1923, Dr. Wilfred Post, medical director of the Near East
Relief in Constantinople wrote the following report:
The Greek and Armenian refugees in Constantinople probably number
about thirty thousand; the Armenians have been here for a long time and by
this time are tolerably well taken care of; but the plight of the 25,000
Greek refugees is becoming daily more pitiful. The location of the camps
and the general conditions under which the people are living have been
more or less public in the press, but the sanitary aspect of the whole
problem has been given insufficient prominence, nor has any effective
remedy been suggested.
The majority of the Greek refugees arrived here already in a most
wretched condition. They are forced, according to their own statement, to
choose between deportation to the far interior of Asia Minor among hostile
tribes, or exile to a foreign land. In either case it meant leaving their homes
in midwinter, hasty flight and arduous travel for days or weeks, and danger
and terror all the time. Small wonder then that these wretched people, for
the most part ignorant villagers, started on their long journey of exile with
morale thoroughly broken and feel prey all the more readily to small pox,
typhus, and other diseases which always make their appearance under such
conditions.
Many died on the journey to the sea, many more in the filthy and crowded
ships. When they were finally landed in Constantinople, comfortable
quarters and good food might have saved many, but instead they were
cramped into barn like buildings insufficient to house half their number,
and for the most part received nothing but the relief ration of a limited
amount of bread and in some cases one dole of soup daily.
The Turkish commandant of Selimie told me he had received instructions
to prepare for the reception of 3,000, and that he was then forced to
receive not less than 10,000. Constantinople is the last place in the world
fitted to receive and care for a large influx of refugees, frequent fires and
consequent congestion of population together with the presence of many
thousands of earlier exiles, made this recent addition to the population a
veritable calamity.
In addition to the bad condition on land, there are ships in the harbor still
crowded with refugees, for whom there is no place in the city, and no
possibility of transporting to Greece. I have first-hand knowledge of
conditions on these ships, having recently convoyed 3,000 people to
Greece on a cargo boat that should not have attempted to carry more than
1,000. I saw cases of smallpox typhoid, dysentery, pneumonia and typhus
all lying in a huddled heap together. There was no room to separate them.
Bathing was out of the question and medical care was hardly worthwhile.
On a similar ship where the people were kept on board three weeks, 200
died out of 2,000; it was a veritable ‘Black hole of Calcutta’.
This state of affairs is not only an outrage on humanity, but a serious
menace to the health of the whole Near East. Quarantine is ineffective, and
the presence of so many sick persons under impossible conditions is bound
to scatter infection. The filth and offal (the entrails and internal organs of
an animal used as food; refuse or waste material; decomposing animal
flesh) thrown from disease-laden ships is devoured by fish which is then
eaten by the people of the city. The fishermen are infected by handling the
fish. Filthy rags and garments are washed ashore constantly. Even the
strictest quarantine calls for a certain amount of communication between
the ships and the shore.
On land the chances of infection are still greater. For example, 500 people
are crowded into a filthy stable with mud floors outside the Selemlie
barracks; most of them are insufficiently clothed and lying either on the
bare ground or on thin pallets or quilting or sacking. On one such quilt
there were seven people, all ill with typhus or dysentery. Two days later
there were only three left; two days later only one; and the last time I was
there, this last unfortunate has passed.
All this time, the rest of the refugees were cooking and eating and living
around the group. As one after the other died, their bodies are carried
jostling thought he crowd to the dead cart, which then moved on until it
was full; then it jogged its way through the streets of Scutari to the edge of
the town where the bodies were dumped unceremoniously into a long pit.
Fly time is coming, when the camps and their great heaps of filth will
become foci of contagion, and when cholera and dysentery are specially to
be feared.
Under present conditions no satisfactory sanitary work is possible. With
the present death rate, the total number of refugees will be reduced half the
number within a few months.
If the new Turkish customs regulations are put into effect, their prohibitive
tariffs on flour, milk, etc. will make further relief work impossible. All we
have been able to accomplish thus far is to vaccinate and feed the refugees,
and bathe as far as facilities can be provided. Thanks to strenuous
representations to the Turkish authorities, we have recently obtained
additional space enough for a 100-bed hospital, where we can isolate the
worst cases of smallpox and typhus.
The best solution of the problem would seem to be to establish at once in
Greece a vast refugee camp similar to that which the British authorities at
Bakuba near Baghdad for 50,000 refugees who came from the Urumia
region in 1918. Until such a place is established for this the Allies should
insist upon something more than the stereotyped official assurances. The
first detachments of refugees taken to such a camp should be from
Constantinople, and after these have been removed there should be no
further landing of refugees in this city, at least under present conditions.
At present the Turkish government has done nothing whatever for the
refugees except to supply insufficient and inadequate housing space. It has
given no food, medicines, clothing or fuel. The explanation given by
Turkish officials is that these people are essentially disloyal, and that the
permission given them to depart is a great act of clemency. It is clemency
to take away from their fertile lands and vineyards these people, whose
ancestors have lived in Anatolia for many centuries and are most of them
so ignorant as hardly to know whether there is a world outside of Anatolia,
and send them to Greece?
Greece is already overburdened; the Constantinople relief committees are
overwhelmed; the hospitals are overcrowded. The present situation is an
increasing disgrace upon the name of civilization and a menace to the
health of the Near East.
Dr. Post’s report is testimony to Man’s Inhumanity to Man.
One can only describe the politicians in Greece who set in motion these
horrible tragedies as ego driven, ignorant fools. The Greek people need to
reconsider who they put into government positions.
THE FUTURE
Albert Einstein said:
“Insanity: doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different
results.”
He also said:
“The only source of knowledge is experience.”
N
ow we know by what measures leaders in government must be measured.
The problems in Greece today one could say started with the Ottoman
Turkish occupation. The Ottomans left Greece almost 200 years ago, and the
Turkish people today are not Ottomans. Responsibility for the problems of
Greece today rests with the Greeks, and only the Greeks. Greece is in a very
sad state, and the Greek people are suffering.
The Greek politicians want to continue to do what they have done since the
beginning of the Greek Revolution in1821. They want to live off of the
income of Europe rather than developing their own economic engine. They
have taught the Greek people to believe they are entitled to a superior
standard of living without earning everything they have. The Greek
politicians have been and are dishonest with the Greek people. It is time for
the truth in Greece, as difficult as that will be to hear. True to the words of
Einstein, the politicians will not change, and the Greek people will continue
to suffer, except the suffering will get worse. Recovery by the hands of the
Greek people will be very, very difficult and painful. Greece needs help.
That help must come from an outstanding leader who puts his country first
and is not complicit with the politicians.
Help must not be given to the Greek Government. History tells us what the
Government will do with any help it receives. Corruption and
mismanagement will render any help useless to the Greek citizen.
The suffering of the Greek people is an awesome opportunity for Turkey to
re-write history. Einstein teaches us the Turkish leadership of today will
remain unenlightened and devoid of imagination and generosity. The
politicians in Turkey would rather spend their time fighting for control over
the political structure of Turkey than demonstrating great leadership.
The Turkish leaders, instead, should identify the Turkish businesses that
would make good partners with Greek businesses. The Greek businesses
would then have banking support, new markets, and a friend when in need.
The Turkish businesses would likewise benefit. The Turkish Government
could provide guarantees to loans to Greek businesses that partner with
Turkish businesses. There are many more ways Turkey could help the Greek
economy and people without lending money to the Greek government. Those
personal friendships created by working together are the best way to erase
the hatred of Turks from the Greek DNA.
Such a proposal appears more reasonable when comparing the sizes of the
two populations and two economies when measured by gross domestic
product. The Turkish economy is much larger and stronger. Turkey does not
have to replace the Greek economy. All that is required is sufficient help to
give the Greeks an economic boost so that people go back to work and start
supporting themselves.
If the Turkish government were to reach out to help the Greek people get
off their knees, the world would know that the Turkish Reformation, begun by
Gazi and President Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, was once again underway.
In recent years, Turkey has been focused on large domestic projects funded
significantly by debt to create employment and raise Turkish wages. The
politicians in Turkey have received support from the electorate for that effort.
At the same time, human rights have suffered. Judges and police have been
fired and military officers put in jail. The heavy hand of government looks
like the acts one would expect from a nervous, insecure dictator. And these
acts are against Turkish Muslims. Non-Muslim Turkish citizens feel even
more at risk, such as the few ethnic Greek and Jewish people left in Turkey.
The Ecumenical Patriarch of the Eastern Orthodox Church located in Istanbul
stated on television that he expects to be crucified by the government.
The political leaders are insensitive to the minorities of Turkey. That is in
sharp contrast to the actions of President Ataturk who made women citizens
equal to men, mandated free education, and made so much social progress
that the world stands in awe. Turkey has that opportunity again by
recognizing that Greeks also are human. Sensitivity can be shown by
following the example of the Italians who created a sovereign territory we
know as the Vatican. The new sovereign state should be the Rum where the
Ecumenical Patriarch and his staff reside in Istanbul, and that sovereign state
should be protected, with pride, by the Turkish authorities. Then Halki could
be opened again as a teaching institution of the Eastern Orthodox Church
without violating the religious education laws of Turkey. Halki would have
the same legal status as a foreign consulate. Turkey should return the Hagia
Sophia to the Church to be the Church it was designed to be rather than the
museum it is now. The cost to Turkey would be zero. The benefits, huge.
Tourism would boom. The world would know the Turkish Reformation
continues, and Turkey would be accepted as a member of the European
Union. The Turks should be very proud to be the protector of one of the
major religions of the world rather than a country that might crucify the
leader of that Church. The Turkish leaders just don’t get it.
Cyprus typifies the problems between Greeks and Turks. Greece and
Greek Cyprus must publicly renounce The Megali Idea and enosis. The core
problem is the Greek Cypriots, supported by Greece, do not want to extend
the same rights to the minority Turkish Cypriots that are extended to Greek
Cypriots. Greece must support equal rights for all Cypriots. This sounds
simple, but Turkey, the Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots are not listening.
They only listen to the person they see in the mirror in the morning. There has
been no effort to develop options.
I developed options and contacted the Turks, Turkish Cypriots and Greek
Cypriots repeatedly in an attempt to make progress. This is an example of
what could be done. It is also testimony to the stupidity of those leaders.
I visited the Turkish Consul General to the U.N. in New York City, Mr. M.
Levent Bilgen. I presented my credentials, the mantle of my Grandfather and
Father. I had the Consul General hold the worry beads of Gazi Mustafa
Kemal while looking at a photograph of Turkey’s greatest leader, a
photograph that was signed Gazi M. Kemal with a personal note to Asa K.
Jennings. I gave the Consul General a copy of the book The Saga of a
Friendship: Asa Kent Jennings and The American Friends of Turkey
authored by a Turkish citizen. Then I presented a proposal for reconciliation
in Cyprus. The Consul General listened without interruption and was most
cordial. Then he made a speech that suggested either he did not hear what I
said or did not care what I said. He took no action on behalf of humanity. I
might as well have been talking to a potted plant.
The Consul General is not free to do as he pleases. His reaction reflects
the Foreign Ministry in Ankara. I have also written to the Foreign Minister,
who later became Prime Minister, and had the letter introduced by a member
of the Turkish media in Ankara who has access to the Foreign Ministry. The
result was the same. There is no interest in creative ideas or solutions. By
contrast, my Grandfather appeared at the office of Mustafa Kemal, got a
meeting with the General, and then an agreement that saved 1,250,000 people
from death and turned Turkey into the peaceful country that it is today. The
highest government officials today in Turkey, Greece and the United States
are no equal to the Gazi.
In my communications with the Turkish Cypriot government of Dr. Dervis
Eroglu I was informed that there would be an agreement with the Greek
Cypriots when the Greek Cypriots agree to all the terms of the Turkish
Cypriots. Those same Turkish Cypriots should try that approach with their
wives and see how far they get. In public, I would expect the politicians
involved would deny what I reported. However, deny and lie are what
politicians do. It is their trade craft.
The Turkish Cypriots are trying to negotiate every issue and term to the
letter with the Greek Cypriots. The Greek Cypriots are led by President
Anastasiades, a skilled Byzantine negotiator. The Turkish Cypriots are
clueless what President Anastasiades is doing to them. To make matters
worse for the Turkish Cypriots, they are spending their energy on any and
everyone around the world who will listen that their case is just. If an
agreement is reached, the agreement will be put to a vote in both the Turkish
and Greek Cypriot populations. That is what happened to the Annan Plan.
Kofi Annan, then Secretary General of the United Nations, worked very
hard to get an agreement. The Turkish Cypriot people were advised by their
leaders, and Turkey, to support the Plan. They did. The Archbishop of the
Greek Cypriots and other Greek Cypriot leaders opposed the Plan. The
Greek Cypriots voted by a margin of 60% against the Plan. Recent polls
show that 60% of the Greek Cypriots still oppose any unification with the
Turkish Cypriots. So no progress has been made despite all that has been
done.
President Anastasiades knows all this. He can spend months and longer
dancing around with the Turkish Cypriot leaders knowing that in the end the
Greek Cypriot citizens will vote the agreement down. He holds the trump
card. The Turkish Cypriot leaders do not understand this basic fact. President
Anastasiades is letting the Turkish Cypriots defeat themselves. However, if
the Turkish Cypriots would execute a plan such as I have proposed, the
Greek Cypriot people would support an agreement. President Anastasiades
is the representative of the Greek Cypriot people, and he will do what they
want and not what he personally thinks is best for them.
Einstein is right. The Turkish Cypriots should be focused on how to get
more than 50% of Greek Cypriots to vote for an agreement. All the foreign
leaders the Turkish Cypriot politicians are spending their time with do not
vote in Cyprus and are a waste of time and precious resources. I have
pointed all this out to the Turkish Consul General and Dr. Eroglu’s
government and his successor President Mustafa Akinci.
The Turkish Cypriots must have the support of the Archbishop and other
religious leaders. The religious leaders have shown signs of possibly
changing to support an agreement. With respect to the Archbishop, I
proposed:
1. Publicly invite the Archbishop to conduct more church services in the
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Is that taking a big risk for
the Turkish Cypriots to make that offer? They did not make the offer.
2. Publicly announce the building of a new Lela Mustafa Pasha Mosque in
the TRNC, and giving the existing building to the Archbishop as the St.
Nicholas Cathedral. The building is a very old, European-styled cathedral
that the Muslims stripped and converted to a mosque. The building is not
designed like a mosque to serve the religious needs of Muslims. This
proposal would shock the Archbishop and Greek Cypriots, and show that
Turks have a sense of sensibility to the Greeks and a sense of what
humanity demands. The Turkish Cypriots would receive support from
around the world, and tourism in the TRNC would benefit. The cost to the
Turkish Cypriots? Minor compared to pontificating the Turkish Cypriot
plea all over the world. Response or interest in this proposal? None.
3. Publicly ask the Archbishop to assume control over the Apostolos
Andreas Monastery. The Turkish Cypriots want to treat this very old
religious place in their territory as a museum. That shows that Turkish
Cypriots lack any sensibility toward Greek Cypriots. If Cyprus is to be one
country rather than two as at present, the human rights of the Greek
Cypriots must be recognized. By not doing such, the Turkish Cypriots are
hurting themselves. The Turkish Cypriots with their “defend Gallipoli at
all costs” mentality are unwilling to give an inch. They always want to
trade. They do not understand that sometimes you gain more by giving
without expecting a trade. This proposal, too, was ignored by the Turkish
Cypriot governments under Dr. Eroglu and President Mustafa Akinci.
The problem in negotiations with the trade approach is conditional offers
include the opportunity for the other party to reject the offer, or attempt to
change the offer, that is, play the circuitous Byzantine game. That approach
plays into the hands of the Greek Cypriots. Then there is no progress. If the
Turkish Cypriots just unconditionally give the St. Nicholas Cathedral and
Apostolos Andreas Monastery to the Greek Cypriots, the Greek Cypriot
religious leaders will gladly accept and have no basis to reject the gifts.
The political leaders will be taken out of their game. The cost is de
minimis, but the benefits would make the Turkish Cypriots winners. The
Greek Cypriots, and people of Greece, and the world would look
differently at Turks and Turkish Cypriots, and support the Turkish
Reformation. That could be the first real step to progress.
4. Publicly ask the Archbishop to supervise repairs to Christian sites in the
TRNC using unemployed Greek Cypriots with funding from the TRNC.
Turkey would probably be willing to fund the repairs. There is high
unemployment among the Greek Cypriots, and that is of great concern to
the Archbishop. With Greek Cypriots doing the work under the supervision
of church leaders, the Turkish Cypriots cannot be criticized for inferior
work. The Turks would only provide payroll and pay for materials. The
Archbishop and Greek Cypriots would be very appreciative, and tourism
for the entire island would increase.
The Christian sites were damaged or destroyed during the 1974 coup
attempt by the Greek Army and Greek Cypriot military forces. This scar of
the past should be removed. When I got to this proposal with the Turkish
Consul General to the United Nations his immediate reaction was whether
the Greek Cypriots would repair the mosques in the Greek Cypriot area of
the island. That shows the Gallipoli mentality and requirement to trade. The
Turks just do not know how to deal with Christians, and are suffering the
consequences. If the Turkish Cypriots (and Turks) are going to negotiate, they
need to know the opposition better than the opposition knows itself.
In addition to these proposals that were designed to secure the support of
one of the most important people, if not the most important, in Greek Cyprus,
the Archbishop, a list of other proposals were made. None have any
significant cost or are prohibitive in any way. Essentially the same proposal
was made to the Turkish Foreign Minister who became the Prime Minister.
No interest was shown by any Turk or Turkish Cypriot.
From my letter to Prime Minister Davutoglu of Turkey:
Prior to the Greek Army landing in Turkey in 1919, Greeks lived next door
to Turks. They ate in each other’s houses and were best friends. That all
changed with the invasion by the Greek Army. When people work together,
play together, and deal with each other frequently, the political barriers are
replaced by personal friendships. That is what must happen to change the
Greek Cypriots from 60% opposed to a federal state to 60% approving a
federal state. Programs need to be started that create this friendship. So
let’s have flea markets on the Turkish side of the border where Greek
Cypriots are invited to display and sell their products alongside the
Turkish Cypriots. Invite the Greek youth to participate in sporting events in
the TRNC where teams are mixed with both Turkish and Greek players.
Then spectators who are supporting a team will be supporting players
from the other end of the island. The more programs there are with Greek
Cypriot participation within the TRNC, the better.
There has been no response.
As a result, I do not expect any agreement will be crafted that the Greek
Cypriot people will support. The Greek Cypriot people still believe in
enosis. No one has explained the folly of that program to them.
The Greek Cypriots think they are in the driver’s seat in the negotiations.
They are, but only because they are negotiating with modern Turks and not
Ottoman Turks. Turkey, with its army stationed in Cyprus could force all the
Greek Cypriots to leave at any time just like Smyrna in 1922. However, that
is no longer the Turkish national character. Turk haters, take note. The Turks
and Turkish Cypriots are more likely to tire of the endless negotiating
gambits and simply make the northern half of Cyprus another province of the
Republic of Turkey. Both Turkish and Greek Cypriots would then be losers.
Another sign of the ignorance that exists at the highest levels of
government is the issue of natural gas located off the shores of Cyprus. The
Greek Cypriots claim the gas belongs to them and not the Turkish Cypriots.
The Turkish Cypriots say the gas should be shared. The Turkish Cypriots,
with the encouragement of Turkey, want the gas to go to Turkey and then to
the European market. So tiny Cyprus would be selling its precious natural
resource on the world market at the lowest price against countries like Iran
and Russia that have huge supplies of gas that have little value to them.
The Greek Cypriots want to build a facility to convert the gas to liquid.
Then they would export the gas. The project makes no economic sense given
the high cost of construction. Turkey wants a pipeline built that adds to the
cost of recovering gas from the bed of the Mediterranean sea. Cyprus should
avoid squandering its limited resources on either project.
The proposal I made was to:
1 Convert the power boilers that generate electricity in Cyprus from
imported diesel to natural gas. All Cypriots would benefit from the
reduction of imports and lower fuel costs. No politician has mentioned or
echoed this proposal.
2 Use the gas as a feedstock to produce higher value products, create
higher value jobs for both Greek and Turkish Cypriots, and insulate the
economy and people from the vacillations of the economy, including gas
prices. The economy could be diversified by producing from gas fertilizer,
paint, rubber, cosmetics, automobile fuel, glue, vinegar, insulation
materials, ammonia and many more products. One of the most important
are many polymers that are the basis for synthetic fabrics. These primary
products would then support export firms, and converters who make
something from these products. Synthetics can be dyed, cut and sewn. The
potential is almost limitless and would provide all citizens of the island
with so many possible opportunities. High unemployment would be a story
of the past. The light has not gone on in the heads of the Cypriot politicians
even after being handed the idea. I told both Presidents in my letters to
them “Creating those jobs would draw support from both populations and
eliminate gas as a problem during your negotiations.” And the reaction or
response? None.
The issue of greater significance in the negotiations between Greek and
Turkish Cypriot governments is the difference in standards of living. This
issue is not even being discussed, but should be of primary concern to the
Turkish Cypriots. In my letter to President Mustafa Akinci of the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus, I wrote:
One of the unspoken, but real, issues in your negotiations is the fact that
Greek Cypriots have a higher per capita income. The Greek Cypriots are
already faced with economic problems, and do not want to be faced with
supporting the poorer Turkish Cypriots. The Turkish Cypriots must achieve
parity. If the Turkish Cypriots can produce a higher level of income than
experienced by the Greek Cypriots, then the Greek Cypriots would want to
join in the Turkish Cypriot prosperity. This is a critical issue, because the
greatest obstacle to a settlement is how to protect the minority Turkish
Cypriots from the excesses of the majority Greek Cypriots. A Turkish
Cypriot population that controls the greater prosperity will hold those
excesses in check. Without this leverage, you will have to settle for a two-
state solution to protect the minority.
The prosperity the Turkish Cypriots must achieve comes from money. The
quickest way to accelerate the Turkish Cypriot economy would be the
establishment of one or more investment banks that offer confidential
investment accounts with superior financial returns. In other words, create
a banking opportunity like the Swiss offered before they started disclosing
depositor information to foreign governments. There will be a flight of
money to the TRNC. Those same investors might not trust the Greek
Cypriot banks after the recent haircut suffered by depositors. The TRNC
with its better banking reputation would create high income banking jobs,
and funding for construction and other bank loans in the TRNC and around
the world. The TRNC has invested heavily in education, and particularly
at the university level. Those graduates would be leaders of this economic
development. Other countries would object to the investment bank
proposal, but those other countries do not recognize the TRNC and have
done nothing to breach the isolation of the Turkish Cypriot people. Such
objections should be rejected.
“When an opportunity presents itself, you must seize upon that opportunity,
or it is the same as if the opportunity was never there.” Asa K. Jennings
wrote this to his son Asa W. Jennings on the occasion of AWJ’s 17th birthday.
The Greek Cypriot people are suffering with high unemployment and
lower wages, because Greek Cypriot banking officials lied when asked
where deposits were being invested. Contrary to instructions given to them,
these banking officials invested in Greek sovereign debt. Those values
evaporated with the implosion of the Greek economy. The solution was to
write off deposits, that is, tell those depositors that their deposits no longer
existed. Who in the world would now trust a Greek or Greek Cypriot
banker?
The Turkish Cypriot bankers have an opportunity that the Greek Cypriot
bankers have lost.
The isolation of a group of people from the world’s economy and
diplomacy, that is, the Turkish Cypriot people, is an issue. Even the United
States which values Turkey as one of its closest allies does not
diplomatically recognize the existence of the Turkish Cypriots as a sovereign
country. The U.S. and world recognize the Greek Cypriot half on the island
and trade with the Greek Cypriots. That trade contributes to the higher
standard of living the Greek Cypriots enjoy. So the U.S. and world are part
of the problem. The Turkish Cypriots owe the U.S. and world no apology or
help with world citizens interested to invest their money without the invasion
of their bank accounts by foreign governments. The sovereignty of citizens
must be protected from the excesses of governments.
The last President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, Dr. Dervis
Eroglu, is a trained medical doctor specializing in urology. The current
President Mustafa Akinci is a trained architect. The President of the Greek
Cypriots is Nicos Anastasiades, a lawyer. None were trained in how the
economic ecosystem works. So managing foreign trade to prevent the
financial drain of imports is unknown to them. Diversifying the economy, like
a company diversifies its business, to prevent wild swings in employment
and depressing effects on that economy that impact people is not considered.
The same is true in the U.S., and Cyprus serves as an example of what is
possible.
The U.S. has a huge trade deficit. Much of that is trade with China. So the
Chinese are enriched, and that funds their military. So the U.S. is forced to
adopt huge military budgets to protect the U.S. from the power created by the
trade imbalance. Every country should be thinking in these terms.
The U.S. problem could be solved easily and quickly by understanding that
foreign trade is an instrument of foreign policy. Low wage imports from
China should be shifted to other low wage countries like the neighbor of
Greece, Macedonia. The Kurds who have fought for generations for their
sovereignty under the brilliant leadership of Mustafa Barzani and now his
son Masoud Barzani critically need jobs. The U.S. and other enlightened
countries could create an economy of good jobs for the Kurds and Palestine
people in a nation carved out of the carcass of Syria nestled up against
friendly Jordan. Jordan is populated by more Palestinians than native
Jordanians, and King Abdullah’s wife is Palestinian. With good jobs, stable
economy and hope, the Palestinians would be a valuable neighbor to secure
the peace for Israel. Syria could be reduced to a peaceful nation, and Hamas
isolated and extinguished.
High wage jobs required to make products that are being imported should
be performed domestically. In the U.S. that means moving those businesses to
areas in the U.S. that need jobs like Detroit, West Virginia, and the Watts
section of Los Angeles. Higher value jobs placed in domestic locations give
the local population financial leverage in world markets and contribute to a
higher standard of living. The potential the U.S. has is the same for all
countries that manage their balance of trade and economy.
The politicians of both north and south Cyprus need to understand the
economic ecosystem in which their peoples live and work. Their actions do
not demonstrate this understanding. If they did, the Greek and Turkish Cypriot
citizens would be coming together for their common good as one country
respecting the human rights of all. This is what should be on the negotiating
agenda rather than parsing words.
There are a lot of people on the island of Cyprus and elsewhere in the
world that want the politicians on the island to be successful. When
suggestions are offered, but not acknowledged, people give up on the
politicians. The mood turns dark. The politicians should minimally be
involving in the decision making the people they represent. What is being
suggested? What is adopted? What is not adopted, and why? Credit those
who help, but thank all, and the politicians will receive more suggestions.
They will be shocked at the help that is available. A daily propaganda
statement and a few meetings with other politicians do not qualify for a
dialogue with the people who are affected by what politicians do and do not
do. The politicians have a lot to learn.
Albert Einstein said:
“When the solution is simple, God is answering.”
But, no one is listening in Cyprus, Turkey, the U.S. and elsewhere.
GAZI MUSTAFA KEMAL ATATURK
The Father of the Turks
A
nyone interested to know more about this extraordinary leader should read
Andrew Mango’s book Ataturk. That is the definitive biography. Andrew
Mango, Ataturk, (Woodstock, New York: The Overlook Press, 2002)
However, another insightful book and very interesting read is Gray Wolf.
H.C. Armstrong, Gray Wolf, (New York: Minton, Balch & Company, 1933)
This book was banned in Turkey for years, but is available now.
I will not attempt to tell what has already been told. However, the regular
meetings my Grandfather and Father had with the great leader provide some
understanding to his greatness.
First, the photo President Ataturk gave to my Grandfather has his
monogram at the top of the frame: GMK. That stands for Gazi Mustafa
Kemal. He had not yet been bestowed with the family name of Ataturk by the
Legislature of Turkey. He personally signed the photo as “Gazi M. Kemal.”
What is so interesting about this fact in 1931 is that he was President of
Turkey, but he did not sign has name as President. Turkey would have many
presidents, but only one Gazi. He was proud of the title. The title signified
that he was both the exceptional military leader in charge of all Turkish
forces and the distinguished diplomat who directed all foreign relations.
Photo of Gazi M. Kemal
He was well known for being a very hard worker. My Father kept a daily
diary and noted his meetings with President Ataturk at 3 a.m. How many
other chief executives of countries are still meeting with advisors at 3 a.m.?
Often leaders let their egos get control of them and then think they are
smarter than everyone else. Not President Ataturk. He constantly had a
parade of visitors of all kinds and ranks. He listened. Therefore, he was the
best informed. Then he made his decisions. True to his military background
and experience, he did not hesitate. He acted quickly, and was not afraid to
act. Some of those decisions were stunning.
For example, he outlawed the fez. Ottoman Turkish men had always worn
the fez. To someone who was not Turkish, outlawing the fez might not seem
striking, but when people have known only the fez, this was striking.
President Ataturk’s word was law, and the Turkish men immediately changed
to the western style hat with the brim. It was said that President Ataturk
imposed this change so men could no longer bow down touching their heads
on their prayer rug. The mullahs were a voice of opposition to the
Reformation of Turkey, and President Ataturk stamped them out.
Ottoman women had traditionally worn the Islamic head scarf. President
Ataturk banned such apparel in public institutions. He saw marking women in
such a way as subjugation. He knew for the new Republic of Turkey in 1923
to get off its knees and grow into a strong country all citizens must work to
their fullest. Women could not be kept out of the workforce or treated
differently. President Ataturk had a vision of the future that was well ahead
of his fellow citizens. Even today, the current President violates that law and
has women wearing the scarf in public buildings. He also says women are
inferior to men. He is ignorant, and the President of some 77 million people.
The Koran says both men and women must dress conservatively. So visitors
to countries like Saudi Arabia see people with their arms covered. There are
no short sleeves or short shorts. The Koran does not require women to wear
the burqa or other forms of head dress. Such attire is a custom, not a religious
requirement. Countries that impose such a custom also have a high incidence
of poor treatment towards women, that is, subjugation of women. Countries
that believe in liberty, and the economic and social growth that liberty
fosters, ban such segregation. That is what President Ataturk did.
Another example of how the Gazi acted quickly and decisively was his
response to crime. The minorities had left Turkey, but there still was not a
civil police force. Hijacking of trucks was a particular problem. So
President M. Kemal issued an order that hijacking would be punishable by
death. Immediately a truck going from Izmir (Smyrna) to Adana was
hijacked. President M. Kemal sent the Turkish Army out to find the criminals.
Several days later the Army entered Izmir with 12 prisoners. The Army said
these 12 men were responsible for the hijacking. They were tried that day,
and found guilty. The next morning at sunrise the 12 were executed by
hanging in Izmir. My Father who witnessed this said people for miles around
came to the park to see these 12 men. People stood in the park, but no one
spoke. At sundown the 12 were cut down and removed. That was the end of
hijackings. Everyone knew that President M. Kemal meant business.
In truth, we don’t know if those 12 were guilty or not. Hopefully, they
were. President M. Kemal might have followed the practice of Saudi Arabia
today. When there is a murder, within a few days someone is arrested and
charged with the murder. Then he is quickly tried and executed. Sometimes
that person is an expatriate from some country like Korea who had nothing to
do with the murder. The reason for this practice is to project the image that
such behavior as murder will not be tolerated. The social cost of killing a
person is considered to be less than the cost of more murders and other
criminal conduct. The Turkish people are compliant to authority more than
Armenians, Greeks, and U.S. citizens, as examples. The executions set the
tone to suppress crimes of all kinds. This is part of the brilliance of his
leadership.
In the U.S. when I was an officer in the U.S. Navy my ship left for Cuba
with a new crew during the period of the missile crisis. We were trying to get
the crew trained for battle with the Cubans. There were two sailors, both
named Homan, but not related to each other, who were giving the petty
officers a hard time. The petty officers wanted to write them up for Captain’s
Mast. One of my extra duties was that of being the Legal Officer on the ship.
The Captain told us to delay writing the Homans up for Captain’s Mast. If the
Captain had given them brig (jail) time on the ship, Navy Regulations
required posting a 24 hour guard. Our mission was to get ready to fight the
Cubans, and not waste time on guarding a prisoner. Instead, the petty officers
were told to wait until the night before we arrived in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
We had Captain’s Mast the first morning we were in Cuba, and the Captain
sentenced the Homans to 30 days in the brig operated by the U.S. Marines. It
is hot and sunny in Cuba.
The first day the Marines took the two bad actors to a rock pile, gave them
sledge hammers, and told them to break the rocks. One of the Homans
refused. So a Marine picked up the sledge hammer and cracked it over the
hand of the Homan breaking his hand. Homan was then taken to the hospital
where the Navy doctors set the bones and put the hand in a cast. Homan was
still a prisoner. So he was returned to the Marines who then took Homan,
still on the first day, back to the rock pile. Homan broke rocks for 30 days
with one hand. When the two Homans returned to the ship after 30 days the
crew wanted to know why one had a cast on his hand. We never had a
discipline problem after that with some sailor mouthing off to the petty
officers. Again, there is a social cost to breaking someone’s hand, but that is
less than the cost of a crew that does not follow orders. This is difficult for
people who have never served in the military to understand. President M.
Kemal understood perfectly.
In the U.S. one of my patents for cap printing was infringed. I sued. By the
time the Federal Court scheduled us for trial two years later there were then
13 companies stealing our patented technology and selling thousands of look-
alike products that did not work as advertised. The consumers were being
bilked. Once I got the guilty verdict and large award, the infringement
stopped. However, the businesses that would be interested in printing caps
were disillusioned with printing from their unsuccessful experience printing
with ineffective copies. Instead, they started decorating with expensive
imported embroidery machines. Embroidered caps cost a lot more than
printed caps. So the delay by the Federal Court is costing consumers. The
U.S. Constitution says people are entitled to a speedy trail, not one delayed
for two years. President Ataturk would have never waited for two years.
In 1922-23 crime was endemic. President M. Kemal knew that if Turkey
was to enjoy peace and prosperity, the crime must be stamped out. He took
decisive action. The public did not object, because law biding people
understood that criminal acts must be stopped to protect them. The Turkish
people respected him for the decisions he made on their behalf. In the U.S.,
by contrast, we are so concerned about the “rights” of criminals that we make
the public pay heavily. There are cases where the crime was clearly
committed. For example, Boston bomber Dzhokhar Tsarnaev was shown in
2013 clearly on film placing a bomb next to people who were killed by the
explosion. The evidence is also clear and compelling that Army Major Nidal
Malik Hasan killed 13 people and injured 30 more at Fort Hood in TX in
2009. Neither has been or probably will be executed, but will waste millions
more of public funds on appeals that could be better spent on education and
helping law biding citizens improve their standard of living. U.S. citizens
generally believe this to be civilized conduct to waste billions of dollars on
the prosecution and incarceration of criminals rather than helping honest
citizens, but the Turkish model shown to us by President M. Kemal was
clearly more effective.
The greatest decision by Gazi M. Kemal was made on September 20,
1922. The Greek Army had been defeated and beat a hasty retreat from
Turkey. The Gazi allowed the Turkish soldiers and civilians to vent their
wrath against the remaining co-conspirators to the killing and destruction in
Turkey. This date, September 20, was the day Asa K. Jennings recorded that
he was overcome by an uncontrollable desire to get ships to remove the non-
Muslims from Turkey.
AKJ went to see the Gazi. The Gazi received him and listened to him like
the Gazi had listened to so many others on every possible subject. That
would never happen today. To get a meeting, a person would have to be a
major political donor or notable person with connections.
To the credit of the Gazi, the Gazi allowed the meeting and listened to
AKJ, a 5’2” hunchback from the U.S. who did not speak Turkish or have any
connection to Turkey other than his humanitarian work. AKJ had no title,
authority or other distinguishing characteristic that would qualify him to see
the great leader of the Turkish people. AKJ did have a reputation for heroism
and altruism that was striking to the Gazi. Perhaps that is why the Gazi
allowed the AKJ meeting. In 1931 Barant Burhans, who worked for AKJ on
the modernization of Turkey, wrote to his Uncle Nick describing AKJ in
these terms:
He is a little fellow with a hump-back. It left him a permanent cripple with
a very weak heart. Altogether he is something of a genius and his
particular abilities are in making friends and convincing others that he is
right.
That describes AKJ in his meeting with the Gazi.
The proposal was to remove the non-Muslims from Turkey so the Gazi
could turn his attention to peace and prosperity for the Turkish people. The
Gazi who had lived his entire life as an Ottoman army officer and who had
just completed a nasty war with the Greek Army, made a decision completely
out of character for a person at that time and of that background. He agreed
with the man he had just met, AKJ. The Gazi placed his trust in this unknown,
diminutive man, but gave him only 7 days to evacuate the City of more than
350,000 people. That decision completely changed Turkey forever. Turkey
has been at peace until today, and even with the disintegration of neighbor
Syria, Turkey has avoided conflict. Instead, the Turkish people are hosting
some 1.8 million Syrian refugees at a tremendous cost to Turkey. Turkey is,
indeed, a different country than when the Ottomans ruled.
Gazi, and President, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk was, indeed, an extraordinary
and uniquely different leader. He remained the servant of the Turkish people
to the end of his life and without enriching himself. Today, Turks of all
backgrounds and persuasions, hold him with greatest respect as the leader
they admire the most. He is semi-deified by the Turkish people.
“...within the heart of every man sleeps a lion...”
ASA W. JENNINGS
A
sa W. Jennings was the eldest child of Asa K. and Amy W. Jennings. He
was also my Father.
He was born June 26, 1907 in Forestport, New York, in the parish house
of the Methodist Church. So he was barely age 15 during the holocaust of
Smyrna. He also had a sick and physically weak Father, and a Mother who
was terrified by the killing and human tragedy. On September 13, 1922, Asa
W. Jennings (AWJ) accompanied his Mother, younger brother and sister on a
U.S. destroyer to Piraeus, Greece, the port of Athens. The family returned to
the U.S., except AWJ returned to Smyrna to assist his Father. Either Asa
could have been killed at any time by one of the wild, and violent people on
the streets seeking revenge, loot or physical pleasure from any non-Turk they
encountered.
AWJ went wherever AKJ went in most instances, and therefore had
personal contact with high level Turks and Greeks, and in particular, Gazi
Mustafa Kemal. In photos, AWJ was dressed in a suit like an adult, and
looked 10 years older than his age. The Gazi had learned that he could trust
AKJ with the most critical assignments on behalf of Turkey, and that mantle
of trust was passed on to AWJ.
AKJ was very influential with AWJ. On AWJ’s 17th birthday, AKJ wrote a
letter to AWJ that included:
I do not despair because of handicaps unless one has a weak desire to
master them. They may be made to contribute to our success and the
development of a stronger character. In the last analysis, we are all
creatures largely of our own destiny.
Talking about the beautiful sunset, he said:
So like many opportunities in life we must be prepared and in a position to
appreciate and take advantage of them when they come our way. It is said
that a man makes his opportunities, but this is not wholly true. There are
times of rare opportunity that come to but few, but unless those to
whom the opportunities present themselves grasp them and are
prepared to use them the result is the same as though the opportunity
had not come their way.
I have been speaking of rare opportunities but there are always worthwhile
opportunities for one to be of service, in one form of expression or
another, to his fellow man and it is my hope and prayer and confident
expectation that you will, as far as possible, prepare yourself for some of
these worthwhile expressions of life in service for others. I want you to
make full use of any little help we may be able to give you. Some day you
will take a man’s place in this rich world of possibilities and as you rise
to the zenith of your full manhood, and the shadows of my work day
lengthen, we, your mother and I, shall realize fully all the wonderful hopes
we had for you when, yes even before, the doctor said ‘cherries are ripe,
you have a son.’
If you are properly prepared, physically, mentally, spiritually, you will
give a good account of yourself.
After the rescue AWJ stayed in Turkey near his Father and attended Robert
College in Istanbul. This college exists today and was an American run
school. After completing two years, AWJ returned to the U.S. where he was
planning to attend Harvard. However, his Father met Hamilton Holt,
President of Rollins College in Winter Park, Florida, on the ship. Hamilton
Holt convinced AKJ to send his son to Rollins College. AWJ completed his
college work at Rollins with his Mother living several blocks down the
street on Antoinette Avenue.
AKJ died in 1933 while AWJ was enrolled in New York University Law
School. Upon graduation, AWJ married my Mother Irene Mackedon from the
State of Washington in the spring of 1934. She had formerly been engaged to
AWJ’s roommate in New York City, Edward R. Murrow of CBS radio. Ed
made the introduction. The courtship with my Father was short during the
Great Depression, and they got married at the Rollins College Chapel. Then
they drove back to New York City where my Father took the bar exam based
on my Mother reading class notes provided by close friend Fred Stone. Fred
Stone was never able to pass the bar exam from those same notes. My
parents immediately left on their honeymoon. The ticket for first class
accommodations on a state-of-art ship at the time, the SS Washington, was
$100. First they went to France, then Germany where they were horrified by
the Nazi movement, then Italy, Greece and finally Turkey. The humanitarian
organization founded by AKJ, The American Friends of Turkey, depended on
donations from wealthy Americans. The sources of funds dried up during the
Great Depression. AWJ’s assignment was to shut down the operations of The
American Friends of Turkey.
AWJ made a courtesy call upon President Ataturk to explain the
termination of The American Friends of Turkey. The Gazi asked AWJ what
he planned to do in the future. My Father told President Ataturk that he had
just passed the bar exam, and intended to practice law in New York City. He
had not yet practiced law even one day, and did not have a job with a law
firm. He was unemployed. President Ataturk appointed AWJ, who he trusted
as he had trusted AKJ, to be Turkey’s lawyer in the U.S. The appointment
came with a $50 retainer per month. That was big money during the Great
Depression. That decision paid huge dividends for Turkey in 1940. President
Ataturk died in 1938.
In 1940 Greece was attacked first by Italy, an ally of the Nazis. The
Italians were unsuccessful subjugating the Greeks. So the Bulgarians and
later the Germans joined the Italians to put down the Greek resistance. The
neighbor of Greece, the country that controls the warm water access to
Russia, was Turkey. Russia was the enemy of Germany. Turkey expected the
Germans would want to seize the Dardanelles and access to the Black Sea.
Russia had a railroad line that extended down to the Black Sea that could be
used to support the Russian war effort. Turkey immediately went on full
military mobilization under the leadership of President Ismet Inonu, President
Ataturk’s closest friend.
Turkey did not have the war materials it needed to defend its sovereignty.
So AWJ was presented with a long list of materials required. 100,000 Colt
revolvers with ammunition. Wire. Chemicals to make explosives. Airplanes.
Airplane trainers. Mules to move the material up the mountains. And much
more. Britain was pleading with the U.S. for aid during the Battle of Britain,
but the U.S. did not help Britain until after the attack on Pearl Harbor on
December 6, 1941. However, AWJ acquired all the materials in 1940 that
Turkey requested, had the material loaded on ships with flags of neutral
countries, and then sent the ships to South America. Then the ships crossed to
Africa and went north to the Mediterranean. No ship was lost to the U-boats
on the hunt in the Atlantic.
For this service beyond the scope of legal advice to the Turkish Embassy
in Washington, the Turkish Government decided to pay AWJ an additional
sum. There was not a line item in the budget passed by the Turkish
Legislature for this payment. So with a vote of all Cabinet members agreeing,
money was assigned to pay AWJ. A copy of the Turkish order is available
upon request from the author of this book.
During wartime, insurance for maritime freight is typically 10 times the
normal rates. AWJ had difficulty finding any insurance firm willing to
provide insurance at any cost. Finally, he found a small firm in the Wall
Street area of New York City, Corroon Brothers. Corroon collected large
premiums during 1940-41, but never had to pay a claim. For the rest of my
Father’s life every Thanksgiving and Christmas Larry Corroon would appear
at my Father’s law office in New York City with a fresh turkey, mince meat
pie, and fifth of Pinch Scotch. As Larry told me years later, his Father told
him the Corroons don’t forget friends.
After the U.S. entered World War Two the U.S. wanted to support the
Russians in their fight against Germany. The best route was via Turkey.
Taking ships through the Suez to Iran, and then overland to Russia was
difficult, slow and costly. However, Turkey was neutral during World War
Two, and Germany had many spies in Istanbul. The Russian front kept the
German Army fighting in many areas besides Western Europe. My Father
went to the Turkish Government with a request that he wanted to send ships
with flags of neutral countries through Turkish territorial waters, that is the
Bosphorus, to the Black Sea and Russia. If the German spies detected what
was happening, Turkey certainly would have been invaded by Germany.
Turkey assumed a huge risk, and allowed the support requested by AWJ. This
Turkish help is unknown to the world as far as I know. The U.S. lost some
400,000 people during World War Two, but the Russians lost millions of
people. The conditions in Russia were desperate. The Germans never cut the
railroad line from the Black Sea to the Russian forces.
AWJ spoke English, German, French, and Turkish, and had a partial
knowledge of Arabic and Farsi, the language of the Persian (called Iranian
today) people. Although my Father never worked for the U.S. State
Department, he was a master diplomat....which I witnessed many times.
After World War Two he was retained by U.S., U.K., French, Turkish and
other companies to get them out of contracts or to negotiate better terms. He
also was council to foreign governments. For example, he represented the
Government of Afghanistan from 1947 until his death in 1972. Most of that
work had to do with water rights, and he traveled to Afghanistan typically
once a year. On one trip my Father and Mother drove from India through the
Khyber Pass to the major cities of Afghanistan, and were confronted by
members of the Russian Army.
Another interesting client was Mustafa al-Barzani, leader of the Kurds in
northern Iraq. Typically they met in Paris where al-Barzani had an apartment.
However, on one occasion my US Navy ship happened to be in Norfolk,
Virginia, when my parents happened to be home in Connecticut. So I went
home for the weekend. My parents always had a bourbon and water before
dinner. My Father and I went into the bar in the house for him to make them
drinks. I noticed canon shells on the counter and asked where these came
from. My Father never served in the military. Then the interrogation started.
My Father said, “I picked them up.”
I responded, “Where were you when you picked them up?”
Answer: “Northern Iraq.”
“Northern Iraq? How did you get there?”
Answer: “I flew.”
My Father had his own plane in Connecticut and had flown for years. He
would take the planes of clients in foreign countries and go flying.
“You flew? That is a no fly zone. If the Iraqi Air Force picks you up on
radar, they will send the Mig-23’s after you.”
“I flew low.”
“How low did you fly?”
“When I got to a telephone line I had to increase my altitude.”
“How did you know how to get to your destination?”
“I used a road map.”
He landed on the road, got out of the plane, and went into Mustafa al-
Barzani’s tent while the horsemen circled around. When the meeting was
over, the two were standing outside the tent and my Father noticed
scarecrows in the field, but there were no crops to protect. My Father asked
why there were scarecrows. Al-Barzani said the Iraqi pilots (Arabs) thought
those were Kurds (non-Arabs who the Arabs were attempting to exterminate)
and would expend their ammunition firing at the scarecrows. So my Father
walked around the field and picked up the shell casings that dropped out of
the fighter aircraft. Then he got back in the plane and flew back to Baghdad.
You can just imagine what the Kurds thought of my Father.
Image 30 Photo of Asa W. Jennings
My Father and I, prior to my entering the Navy, had gone to outdoor
nightclubs in Baghdad during curfew when you could be shot on sight to meet
with clients. He took some unusual risks during his life. Iraq is a Muslim
country where alcohol was forbidden, but there was plenty at the clubs for
the Arab men....along with belly dancers and such entertainment.
My Father originally went to Iraq on behalf of TAMS (Tibbits, Abbot,
McCarthy & Stratton), a design engineering firm that built the Pan Am
building over Grand Central Station in New York City and the Pan Am
terminal at JFK Airport. TAMS was engaged in work in Iraq when a colonel
in the Iraqi army, Abdul Karim Kassem, killed the royal family and took over
the country as a dictator. Kassem said he did not agree to the contracts with
various firms, including TAMS, and therefore was not going to pay. My
Father’s job was to get the money already owed, plus money for the work
TAMS continued to do in Iraq.
To get started, my Father had to get a visa issued by the Iraqi Government
to enter Iraq. My Father’s U.S. passport number was No. 7. Check your
passport, and you will find a single digit is most unusual. My Father made
repeated attempts over several months, but was unsuccessful. So he flew
from New York City to Washington, D.C., to meet with the Iraqi Ambassador.
This is a lesson in how business is conducted in the Middle East.
The first one hour and 55 minutes of a two hour meeting are spent on
meaningless trivia. Then all the business is done in the last five minutes. The
Ambassador asked why my Father had come to the embassy. When my Father
explained that he was unable to get a visa, but was welcome in all other
Arab countries, the Ambassador said that Iraq did not need another lawyer.
My Father assured him that he wanted to visit regarding one matter, and that
his law practice was and would remain in New York City and home in
Connecticut. Then the Ambassador had excuse after excuse. Finally, my
Father said, Mr. Ambassador, there must be another reason. “Well, Mr.
Jennings, there is. It’s your name. We think you are Jewish, because your
name is Asa. We don’t want any Jews in Iraq.”
My Father asked if there was a Bible in the embassy. Yes there was, and it
was handed to my Father. He then turned to 1Kings 15:9 “Asa became king of
Judah” and 1Kings 15:16 “Now there was war between Asa and Baasha,
king of Israel, all their days.” “That did it,” said the Ambassador, and the
visa was issued.
When my Father got to Baghdad he would check into the Baghdad Hotel,
go to his room, and type an itinerary of where he would be minute by minute
for his entire stay in Baghdad. Then he went to the police station and gave a
copy to the police chief so it would be easier for the secret police to follow
him. My Father also had panty hose in his suitcase, the rage at the time among
women. My Father would go to the basement of the Hotel, find the tap room,
and introduce himself to the police agents listening to the phone
conversations. Then he would give the police panty hose to take home to
their wives. Baksheesh (bribe) is accepted in Iraq. Those police would be
heroes when they got home. Of course, there were little gifts for the police
chief. My Father made trips in and out of Iraq without getting much work
accomplished just to get the police comfortable with him. On one occasion
my Father spoke from his hotel room for an hour to someone. When he hung
up the phone, the phone rang again. It was the police in the basement. “Mr.
Jennings, I did not happen to catch the name of the person you were talking
with. Could you please tell me who that was for my report?”
The TAMS money was collected bit by bit, but in full. Abdul Karim
Kassem was killed and replaced by another thug, Saddam Hussein.
One of the companies AWJ advised in Turkey was Williams Brothers
Construction, now Williams Companies, a pipeline company from Tulsa,
OK. My Father arrived late at night at the airport in Istanbul while going to
Turkey. He was singled out, taken to a room, stripped searched and some
custom’s agent put his finger up AWJ’s rear end looking for drugs. There
were no drugs. During this indignant procedure my Father saw a list on the
lectern of all the Williams Company executives. In Turkey, you don’t argue
with the authorities. My Father went along with the inspection and was
released. However, he was hot. First he sent a telegram to Tulsa telling the
executives to avoid visiting Turkey until my Father got the problem resolved.
Then he went to his good friend, the Minister of Public Works, to complain.
The Williams Companies had fired its project manager for corruption, and
given him a one way ticket to fly home. He cashed the ticket, stayed in
Turkey, and made a report to the authorities that all the top executives of
Williams were carrying drugs. Problem resolved.
AWJ also represented Williams in Iran. One of the problems was the
ancient city of Shiraz. Careful study had been made by engineers of annual
water fall and water content in the ground before designing foundations to
buildings. After the buildings were completed, Iran experienced more rain
than ever on record. The foundations shifted and cracked. Who is going to
pay for this? That was negotiated to a resolution.
Also while in Iran, AWJ represented the Iranian Government to negotiate
flare gas to be sold to Russia. Russia has gas facilities north of Iran in the
Baku area. The ruble was worthless in international trade. When oil is
produced there is gas as a by-product. The Iranians were burning off the gas
rather than stripping it out and distributing the gas around the country. The
negotiation was Russian hard goods for gas. My Father’s comment was no
contract is written in Iran without the Shah personally getting 5% of the
price. Then, of course, his subordinates want some of the contract. A culture
of corruption is created. Corruption is endemic throughout the Middle East.
That increases costs to consumers and reduces the standard of living.
AWJ traveled to other parts of the world advising companies. AGP
(Atlantic, Gulf & Pacific), a small company from New Jersey, won a contract
to dredge the seabed at the port of Marseille, France. Payment was to be by
percentage of completion of the work. Test borings had been made prior to
bidding, and the sea floor was found to be sand. The work would proceed
quickly, or so AGP thought. Once the work started, AGP found the sea floor
to be rock and slow going. The project was going to bankrupt AGP. AWJ was
hired. He found the contract to be air tight. So he sold the job, including sea
going vessels and equipment to a company that had bid on the job and lost out
to AGP. AGP was saved.
He also went to Thailand for Raymond Engineering of Idaho, and said he
would return home in two weeks. He returned seven months later. When he
got to Thailand he found the project manager involved in corruption, and as a
Vice President of Raymond, my Father fired the project manager. Then AWJ
became the project manager buying and selling ships, running the job and
more to get the operations on a profitable footing. Once the company’s
business was under control, Raymond sent a replacement to be in charge. My
Father’s travels in southeast Asia took him to Cambodia and Vietnam. The
French were fighting the Indo-China War in Vietnam. My Father’s comment
was that is a part of the world where the U.S. should never fight a war.
My last conversation with my Father before he died unexpectedly of an
aortic aneurysm was about him accepting an offer to be the U.S. Ambassador
to Turkey. He was about to turn age 65, and that seemed like a great way to
finish his career. He would have made a great ambassador. His concern was
his secretary of 25 years, Nora Carey, who was like a member of the family.
She spent many weekends at our house in Connecticut rather than her
apartment in New York City. Nora was older than my Father and financially
able to retire. I advised my Father to accept the offer. However, he never had
the chance due to his sudden death.
“...within the heart of every man sleeps a lion...”
CAPTAIN IOANNIS THEOFANIDES
Commanding Officer, Kilkis
C
aptain I. Theofanides, later to be Admiral Theofanides, is the great Greek
hero of the Smyrna Holocaust who the Greek people do not know.
I urge Greece to change the name of the airport in Athens from the
Eleftherios Venizelos Airport to the Captain Ioannis Theofanides Airport.
Venizelos led thousands of Greeks to their deaths, and worse, but Captain
Theofanides was responsible for saving thousands of Greek lives. He is the
one who should be honored.
He attended the Hellenic Navy Academy, served in the Greco-Turkish War
of 1897 and the Balkan Wars where he was adjutant to the Greek fleet
commander, Pavlos Kountouriotis. During the Greek Army invasion of
Turkey (1919-22) then Captain Theofanides supported the Greek army with
the big guns of the Greek battleship Kilkis. The Kilkis was the former USS
Mississippi that the U.S. gave to Greece after World War One.
As in all militaries, the Greek Army and Navy had their differences.
Captain Theofanides had some arguments with Greek Army General Frangos.
The two did not like each other. In addition, Captain Theofanides was a
Royalist, that is, a person who supported King Constantine. General Frangos
was a supporter of Prime Minister Venizelos. Greece was polarized into the
two camps, and the disputes were hot.
General Frangos refused to turn over ships to AKJ to save 300,000 Greeks
who the Turks were about to march to their deaths. When AKJ went to
Captain Theofanides, he was willing to do all he could in violation of the
wishes of General Frangos. Frangos wanted to be part of a successful coup
of the Greek Government, and succeed in power and personal position, but
Theofanides wanted to save his fellow countrymen.
After AKJ got control initially of 26 Greek ships, thanks to the critical
help of Captain Theofanides, the Kilkis was ordered to leave the port of
Mitylene, Greece. Shortly after, the Captain was terminated from naval
service. Then when King Constantine’s son George II came into power,
Captain Theofanides was recalled to naval service and promoted to Admiral.
Admiral I. Theofanides had a son Iason who rose to the rank of Admiral,
and a grandson, “Dannys” Theofanides, who also rose to the rank of
Admiral. They are a very distinguished Greek family. The wife of Admiral
Ioannis Theofanides had a great-great-grandfather who was the hero of the
Greek Revolution. He was Theodoros Kolokotronis. When I visited Admiral
“Dannys” Theofanides at his home in Athens he showed me, with great pride,
the memorabilia of generations of family service to their country. They are
true Greek patriots.
When the Greek merchant captains reported that their ships could not make
the trip to the Turkish port of then Smyrna due to mechanical problems,
Captain Theofanides informed the captains that any ship not ready to sail by
midnight would have its captain face court martial. The captain would then
be taken to the fantail of the Kilkis and shot. Suddenly, all the ships were
able to sail at midnight.
“...within the heart of every man sleeps a lion...”
ELEFTHERIOS VENIZELOS
B
orn in Ottoman Crete on August 23, 1864, he graduated from law school in
Athens and returned to Crete. His father was a revolutionary, and Eleftherios
Venizelos had radical ideas. At age 25 he entered politics where he was
recognized as an eloquent speaker. He had no military or business training
and was a revolutionary by profession.
The Greeks in Crete supported enosis which is union with Greece. The
Ottoman Turks on the island opposed a union. Violence broke out. The
conflict was settled diplomatically. Crete became an autonomous state under
the supervision of the Greeks and the Great Powers, and then joined Greece.
He was invited to Greece to settle a dispute and became the leader of the
Greek government. So, in short, he talked his way from law school to head of
the Greek government over a period of years.
Greece then doubled its territory with Constantine, first as Crown Prince
and later as King, in charge of the military, and Venizelos as the political
leader. Their disagreements led to the National Schism with the population
divided between the Royalists supporting King Constantine and the Venizelos
supporters.
Greece entered World War One allied in battle with Serbia, France, and
Britain. The Bulgarians and Germany were defeated. That led to Greece
getting a seat at the Paris Peace Conference, and the spoils of war, and
further expansion of Greek territory. The Greek people supported Venizelos,
and he was welcomed as a hero. However, he did not stop trying to extend
the borders of Greece and made the fatal mistake of landing troops in Turkey.
Greece had been at war almost continually from 1912 to 1920, and
supporters of King Constantine promised demobilization and withdrawal
from Asia Minor to the war weary Greek people. Venizelos lost the 1920
election, but the Royalists did not follow through on their promise. They
continued to press the attack against the Turks, and ultimately suffered a
crushing defeat. Venizelos was defeated due to his abuse of power. He later
returned to political power in 1928.
His reputation was firmly established for expanding the size of Greece at
the expense of many Greek lives by using the military option. After the
complete defeat of Greece, Venizelos offered friendship to the Turks and
even recommended his enemy Mustafa Kemal Ataturk for the Nobel Peace
Prize. He should have made those offers to Ataturk before the Greek troops
landed in Turkey in 1919. His error in judgment was a monumental mistake
that has no recovery. The thousands of lives lost then and in future
generations, plus property and economic resources in Asia Minor are beyond
calculation. He left Greece years later and was sentenced to death in
absentia. He died in Paris in 1936.
He opposed the monarchy, which the Russians had originally proposed to
bring stability to Greek politics, and he defended the Megali Idea. It was this
Megali Idea that was driving the politics of Greece, and ultimately led to the
defeat of Greece at the hands of the Turks. He remains a popular figure
among Greeks despite all the losses he incurred in their name.
His name shall be known in infamy.
METROPOLITAN CHRYSOSTOMOS OF
SMYRNA
C
hrysostomos Kalafatis was born in Turkey in 1867. He studied at the
Theological School on the island of Halki near Istanbul starting at age of 17.
He became the Greek Orthodox Metropolitan bishop of Smyrna from 1910 to
1914. He was notable for his charity work, and for having been deeply
involved in the politics of his day.
The Greek Orthodox Church did not ban its priests from being involved in
politics. Many years earlier Roman Catholic priests similarly were involved
in politics, but the Roman Catholic Church subsequently banned such a
practice. In 1960 Cyprus elected Archbishop Markarios as its first president.
The actions of Chrysostomos against the Turks in Smyrna led to the exile
of Chrysostomos from Smyrna in 1910 until May 2, 1919. George Horton, the
U.S. Consul General in Smyrna and great friend of Greece, is quoted in his
book The Blight of Asia as saying:
On one occasion I was present at an important service in the Orthodox
Cathedral, to which the representatives of the various powers, as well as
the principal Greek authorities, had been invited. The (Hellenic) High-
Commissioner for Ionia, Aristidis Stergiadis, had given the order that the
service should be strictly religious and non-political. Unfortunately,
Archbishop Chrysostomos began to introduce some politics into his
sermon, a thing which he was extremely prone to do. Stergiadis, who was
standing near him, interrupted, saying: ‘But I told you I didn’t want any of
this.’ The archbishop flushed, choked, and breaking off his discourse
abruptly, ended with, ‘In the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
Amen,’ and stepped off the rostrum.
Stergiadis was a stern ruler on behalf of the Greek government who did
not tolerate violence and other uncivil acts by anyone. He even punished
Greeks who attacked Turks, and did all in his power to create a society of
civility between the various minorities in Smyrna.
When the Greek troops arrived in Smyrna, Chrysostomos blessed them. He
also incited violence against the Ottoman Turks which led to his being killed
in the most brutal way by the Turks. The action by the Turkish mob, allowed
by Turkish general Noureddin Pasha, was barbaric. The Turkish people
today, if they knew the history of this butcher Noureddin, would be shocked
and disavow him.
Priests should preach ethics, and explain their religion. They should not be
inciting people to violate the Ten Commandments, such as, “thou shall not
kill.” In the U.S. there is a separation of church and state, but that did not
exist in Turkey. The Greeks and Armenians in Turkey stood in contrast to the
Jews who avoided inflammatory politics. As a result today, we do not hear
claims of genocide by Turks against the Jews of Turkey. The Greek civil
authority, High Commissioner Stergiadis, represented the position that would
lead to peace and Chrysostomos represented the position that led to his
death.
He was declared a martyr and a saint of the Eastern Orthodox Church by
the Holy Synod of the Church of Greece on November 4, 1992.
His life serves as an example to all religious leaders to leave the politics
to the politicians, and only counsel and comfort people with the teachings of
their religion that will make them better people.
REAR ADMIRAL MARK L. BRISTOL, U.S.
NAVY HIGH COMMISSIONER
T
he U.S. Navy, under the direction of RADM Bristol, was very important to
the success of the rescue of some 1,250,000 people, plus the prisoner of war
and population exchanges. Nevertheless, the Navy and State Department
were attacked in the U.S. newspapers. On January 7th, 1924, Asa K. Jennings
wrote to the U.S. Secretary of State:
I was present in Smyrna, as an American YMCA secretary, throughout all
the tragic events of September 1922, as well as before them; and I was
actively engaged in work subsequent upon these events, until June 1923. I
organized the first American Relief Committee in Smyrna; and I secured
from the Greek government the fifty ships in which the three hundred
thousand Greek refugees were evacuated from Smyrna and vicinity and I
was the civilian in charge of this task of transportation. Later I worked
with the commission for the interchange of Greek and Turkish prisoners –
having been named to this position by Colonel Wildbol, the Lausanne
Conference’s appointed president of the commission; and by the Greek and
Turkish representatives.
Perhaps this is enough to tell concerning myself to accredit me as a
competent witness.
In a sentence, I take direct issue with the general report of these published
statements, and I challenge the accuracy of their alleged facts. The glaring
perversions of truth in the articles I have seen can be matched only by their
cruel injustice to true Americans doing an unprecedented task with high
efficiency; and by their black disloyalty to the fair name of America.
The story of Smyrna would have had a terribly different ending had not the
American Government quickly, and without regard to precedents, flung all
its available resources into a matchless ministry of relief. Had not the
American Navy been so largely represented in Turkish waters, and had not
Admiral Bristol’s spirit of swift succor been matched by the fearless and
tireless resourcefulness of the officers and men of the fleet, it simply
would have been impossible to save the three hundred thousand Greek
refugees. I testify that in every conceivable way, short of taking up the fight
of the retreated Greek Army and declaring war upon Turkey, the American
Navy cooperation in the vast and many sided humanitarian work so
suddenly thrust upon the shoulders of America.
Our Navy even went beyond the limits of formal neutrality in meeting this
emergency. I need not cite the familiar story of warships turned into cargo
boats to convey foodstuffs; or that other story of warships turned into
passenger boats to carry hundreds of rescued persons to safety; or that still
other commonplace story of warships turned into floating hotels for the
shelter and maintenance of American nationals.
In particular, as one sufficient rebuttal of the insinuations and charges that
have been made against the Navy’s conduct at Smyrna, let me remind you
that it was our senior naval officer present at the time, Commander Halsey
Powell, who when I informed him by wireless that it might be possible to
secure Greek ships if the necessary guarantees were given, went in person,
on his own initiative, to the Commanding General of Turkish forces in
Smyrna and secured permission for me to take into the Smyrna harbor
many (Greek) ships on which to evacuate enemy (Greek) refugees. It was
also Captain Powell’s assurances to me that made it possible for us to get
from the Greek Government the necessary ships.
Moreover, American destroyers accompanied these Greek transports in
and out of Smyrna Harbor; and American sailors did the actual work of
landing the refugees and their goods on to the ships.
It is needless that I recite further details and incidents here. I simply want
to hear my most explicit and unequivocal testimony to the greatness and
glory of official America’s service to humanity in this time of test.
During my life in the Near East I have seen the official representative of
America – diplomatic and naval – under a great variety of new and trying
conditions; and I have never seen them fail to act promptly and efficiently,
and in absolute impartiality in the service of humanity.
If in any particular of which I have first-hand knowledge, you want further
testimony from me, of course I shall be happy to appear before any
committee and bear witness to the full extent of my power. I never was as
proud of the country which my family have served since the days of the
Revolution as I was at Smyrna.
Admiral Bristol was born in 1868 in New Jersey. He graduated from the
U.S. Naval Academy in 1887 at age 19, and participated in the Battle of
Santiago de Cuba. He served as aide to the Commander-in-Chief North
Atlantic Fleet from 1901-1903, and then commanded a battleship during
World War One. He was then appointed as the U.S. High Commissioner in
Turkey from 1919-1927. Then he assumed command of the U.S. Asiatic
Fleet, and later died in 1939. Admiral Bristol was the last person Asa K.
Jennings visited when AKJ died in Washington, D.C., in 1933 after leaving
the Admiral’s house.
Admiral Bristol was a stern, tough task master. The U.S. was neutral in the
conflict between the Greeks and Turks, and the Admiral was careful to make
sure that no one could say the U.S. was favoring one side over the other. At
the beginning of the Smyrna crisis U.S. Navy personnel acted on
humanitarian grounds only. The mission was to protect American lives and
property. That made the U.S. Navy acceptable to both Greece and Turkey.
Admiral Bristol lived in Istanbul and had close contact with the Turkish
people and officials. He worked diligently to build good relations between
the U.S. and Turkey. He helped found a hospital there which is named after
him. He supported the Armenians on humanitarian terms, but had little
respect for their ability to organize themselves and live peacefully with other
people. As a result, he has been branded as anti-Armenian, but that is not
altogether true.
He was impressed by the actions and results of Asa K. Jennings, and they
became good friends. The respect granted to AKJ by the officers and enlisted
crews under the command of Admiral Bristol certainly affected Admiral
Bristol’s opinion and respect for AKJ and the Admiral’s willingness to help
AKJ.
AWARDS
WHAT PEOPLE SAID ABOUT
ASA K. JENNINGS
T
he Ecumenical Patriarch of the Eastern Orthodox Church, His All Holiness
Meletios:
The Right Hand of God is blessing you in Christianity
This is inscribed on the Golden Cross of Saint Xavier presented to AKJ
along with the Medal of Military Merit by the Greek Government at the same
time.
***
The Common Committee of the Non-liberated Hellens presented AKJ with
a scroll written in gold, a copy of which is enclosed, that says:
The Common Committee of the Non-liberated Hellens, recognizing with
gratitude your majestic and valuable services in saving 300 thousand
refugees exposed to the danger of being slaughtered..., and the many
dangers and labor to which you were submitted during their transportation
and safe-conduct in Greek Territory, Herald You, the real altruist, for this
humanitarian action...
***
The King of Greece, King Constantine, said to AKJ:
The people of Greece and he personally were very grateful for all I have
done and that they need my further services.
This was in a letter from AKJ to his wife, and published in the Utica
Saturday Globe on May 26, 1923.
***
D.A. Davis, Senior Secretary for Europe of The International Committee
of Young Men’s Christian Association, wrote to C.V. Hibbard of the YMCA
in New York City on February 19, 1923, saying:
I think that no one would contradict the statement that Jennings is the best
known and most loved American in the Near East today.
***
Letter from Caleb W. Lawrence, Chairman, American Relief Committee on
October 15, 1922, to Mr. Van Bommel of the YMCA:
When the first Committee was formed Mr. E.O. Jacob was absent at
Phocia, and therefore Mr. Jennings was given an important appointment as
head of the General Relief Department. With his well known fearlessness
and energy he drove his Chevrolet through all parts of the city, locating
refugees and collecting them in camps. He obtained possession of a house,
# 490 Quai, which he immediately filled with women and children. He
was soon obliged to provide for maternity cases and therefore he set apart
one room for a maternity ward. Several confinements were cared for in
this ward #490 filled up until there were some 500 people in it. Mr.
Jennings then got possession of other houses into which he thrust
defenseless girls, children and women. He cared for those helpless
people, often missing his meals and frequently getting only one meal a day.
When the city was burned and the refugee problem was intensified by the
terror-stricken Smyrna Christians the need for ships to evacuate the
multitude became more pressing. Mr. Jennings’ vision and energy was then
well shown by his negotiations with the Captain of an Italian steamer,
‘Constantinople’, which led to the chartering of this ship by our Committee
and the evacuation of some 2,000 refugees from Mr. Jennings houses on the
Quai and from the Quai itself. Mr. Jennings was sent by the Committee to
Mitylene on the ‘Constantinople’, and he there, by sublime courage and
winsomeness and vision, secured an adequate number of ships for
evacuating almost the whole of the Smyrna multitude. Mr. Jennings won the
complete confidence of the Greek Government, and even when the
revolution came, so closely had he watched events and so favorably was
he known that the new Government permitted the Greek ships to go on with
the evacuation of the Smyrna refugees... All honor to Admiral Jennings!!
***
Letter from H. C. Jaquith, Managing Director of the Near East Relief at
Constantinople, to Dr. John Mott, General Secretary, of the YMCA in New
York City:
In a crisis a few men always stand out from the others because of their
initiative or capacity for organization, and in Smyrna Mr. Jennings of the
YMCA has been one of the outstanding personalities; largely because of
his initiative, and persistence, he was able to secure from the Greek
Government a large number of boats which are working on the removal of
refugees under the protection of the American Destroyer. He is jokingly
called the Admiral of the Fleet, and hoists an American flag over one of
the boats.
***
Rear Admiral Mark L. Bristol, United States Navy and High
Commissioner:
Mr. D. A. Davis May 21, 1923
13 Avenue de Champel
Geneva
My dear Davis,
I want to write and tell you how much I appreciate that you permitted Mr.
A.K. Jennings to remain here in the Near East on special work with the
YMCA. I made this request because Mr. Jennings had shown great energy in
assisting our navy in evacuating the Greek refugees from the western coast of
Anatolia and also I felt that this could not have been successful without his
energetic and forceful representations to the Greek Admiral at Mitylene by
which Greek ships were sent to evacuate the refugees. In continuing this
work to its completion and then later by his work in connection with the
exchange of Greek and Turkish prisoners Mr. Jennings has rounded out a
splendid piece of work
I want to inform you, and through you your organization, how highly Mr.
Jennings is respected by myself and the officers and men under my command
in the Navy. I have grown to like Mr. Jennings personally and to admire him
for his intelligence, energy and integrity. I have found it a real pleasure to be
associated with him and I congratulate your organization upon having such a
fine representative in the Near East under the exceptional conditions which
existed while he was there.
I beg to remain,
Sincerely yours,
Signed: M.L Bristol
Rear Admiral, U.S. Navy
United States High Commissioner”
***
Asa K. Jennings avoided attention directed at him, and preferred to give
the credit to others. D.A. Davis in his letter to C. V. Hibbard of the YMCA in
New York City said further:
I have been with him (AKJ) now in Athens, Smyrna, and Constantinople.
Everywhere he seems to be known. Practically no request which he makes
in any quarter is refused. The story of what he has done is one of the most
fascinating of any that I have heard in connection with the war. He has
been too busy to write much about it up to the present time. He is
constantly on the go. For more than a week during the evacuation he had
practically no sleep, some of his greatest work being done as a result of
his arousing governors, admirals, and members of the cabinet from their
beds between midnight and five o’clock in the morning. I am wondering
whether there was ever a time in Greek history where a Greek cabinet
president was called out of bed at five o’clock in the morning and
succeeded in having a cabinet meeting before nine o’clock before Jennings
came along. To a most unusual extent Jennings has the confidence of all the
American organizations working in the Near East as well as all the
American consular, diplomatic, and naval authorities. When we boarded
the “McFarland” the captain put Jennings in his own bed. This is an
indication of the respect I have seen paid to him everywhere...
Jennings read to me about thirty pages of a report on the evacuation which
he has written. It would still be illegible to any one else and he has
promised to put that in shape and as soon as possible to bring us up to
date. It is too much to expect, however, that he will ever give us very
detailed reports of his work; first of all because he is too busy doing things
to talk about them, and doing things that are really worth while; and,
secondly, because he is withal modest and hesitates to report things that
seem to be telling about his own accomplishments.
***
Letter Nov. 25, 1942, from Amy Will Jennings (widow of AKJ) to Mr.
William H. Schneider:
...A big book could not do justice to such a remarkable life so nobly given
in service for humanity.
***
Letter March 3, 1931, written by Barent Burhans, staff assistant to Asa K.
Jennings, in Ankara, Turkey, to Burhans’ Uncle Nick:
...Jennings was their (the Greek refugees in Smyrna) self-appointed
savior...he is something of a genius and his particular abilities are in
making friends and convincing others that he is right...
***
The Nobel Peace Price Committee replied to a letter from Roger Jennings
saying:
In reply to your letter of April 22nd, we shall inform you that Asa K.
Jennings has not been a candidate to the Noble Peace Prize.