15. The Hardships of Early America

THE HARDSHIPS OF EARLY AMERICA
T
he first four ships to come to America were the Mayflower (180 tons) in
1620, the Fortune (55 tons) in 1621, the Little James (44 tons), and the Anne
(140 tons) in 1623. “For many years to come, a careful distinction would be
made between those who came in these four ships, all known as First
Comers, and all who came after them”* p. 3 The Jenny Book, Judith Jenny
Gurney, Gateway Press, Inc., Baltimore, MD 1995 The passengers settled in
the Plymouth Colony in what today is Massachusetts south of Boston.
The Jenny Family in the Plymouth Colony
The Jenny family came to America on the Little James. The Little James
was a small ship of the pinnace class. They were designed for coastal trade
around England, and not for passage across the ocean to America. The Little
James was propelled by sails and oars with a crew of 15 men. The ship had
six small cannons with a 2” bore that could fire a ball weighing a few
pounds. The ship also had 6 muskets for raiding and capturing other ships,
such as from France, Spain and the West Indies. There were 15 passengers
on board. The captain was age 23 and a novice at sailing. Also on board was
a master mariner.
The passengers were English Separatists and former residents of Leiden,
Holland. They joined a hardship settlement where those unfit for harsh
conditions were sent back to England. The first of the Jenny family was John
Jenny. John Jenny erected a mill for grinding and beating corn in Plymouth.
“He was a cooper (barrel maker) by occupation. Leiden records call him a
‘brewer’s man’ of Norwich, Norfolk (England). He was ship’s cooper on
Little James. Arrived on the Little James with wife Sarah and children
Samuel, Abigail, and Sarah. Sarah was born on the ship. Captain Altham
wrote on September 7, 1623 that ‘Good wife Jennings was brought abed of a
son aboard our ship.’ And ‘was delivered of a child in the Ship a month
before we cam a shore and both are well yet, God be praised.’ In the 1623
land division he is ‘John Jenings’ with 5 shares. He was a member of the
1626 Purchaser investment group as ‘Mr John Jenny’.”
The Anne and Little James were financed by London based Merchant
Adventurers. Their intent was to support the Plymouth Colony in return for
furs and other forms of trade.
John Jenny, “the first of his name in America, came to Plymouth, MA, in
the Little James, arriving in August, 1623.”* p. 1 The Jenny Book He was
born May 1585 in Norwich, Norfolk, England. Norwich was second only to
London in wealth, and established its reputation by selling English wool to
the Continent. His name appears in the records of Leyden, Holland, written in
Dutch in June 1614 when he married Sarah Carey from Monksoon, England.
They had 3 children. One died in Holland, and two survived the voyage to
America. They left England from Land’s End on the southwest corner
England just west of Southampton, Exeter, Dartmouth and Plymouth, and
southwest of Bristol in the spring of 1623 on a voyage that took 3 months and
two days long to reach Massachusetts.
“Morton, nearly a half-century after the voyage, wrote, ‘About ten days
after the arrival of the ship called the Ann, above named, there came in
another small ship of about forty-four tons, named the James, Mr. Bridges
being master thereof; which ship the Ann had lost at sea by reason of foul
weather; she was a fine vessel, built to stay in the country. One of the
principal passengers that came in her was Mr. John Jenny, a godly, thought
otherwise plain man, yet singular for the publicness of spirit, setting himself
to seek and promote the common good of the plantation of New Plymouth;
who spent not only his part of this ship, (being part owner thereof) in the
general concernment of the plantation, but also afterward was a leading man
on promoting the general interest of this colony.’
“The ship’s master, John Bridges, saw our Jenneys with other eyes and
from a different angle. On September 9, 1623, writing from Plymouth, he sent
his report on the voyage to James Sherley, one of the Merchant Adventurers
who had built the ship and sent her on this, her maiden voyage. He said, in
part, ‘After a long and troublesome passage we safely araived at our port
with all our company and one more for Goodey Jennengs was delivered of a
child in the ship a month before we cam a shore and are both well yet god be
praised….there never was a finder bote, but as for the company are men
good too but young greene hedded felowes and very uncarefull of aney
husbandrey in a ship whitch makes my trubble grete for lack of a staid man
for our howld We had a greate maney thinges that might have ben saved for
Jenenges he had no laisor for all he could doe with more help was to lettel
for to give tendance to his lazey wife for toppe he and all the rest would not
take paines for theay asailed for nothing. So that from one to another I never
lived with more discontent in my life then I have done…yf we had not
renewed our vetales at the Ile of Wight we cum short of drink especially for
we caryed but 4 hogs hedes of beare in with us and other provetiones mutch
wasted.” pp. 2-3 The Jenney Book
“Nathaniel Morton, quoted on the previous page, describes the pitiful
conditions at Plymouth in the summer of 1623, and the effect this had on the
newcomers: ‘Those passengers, seeing the low and poor condition of those
that were here before them, were much daunted and dismayed, and,
according to their divers humors, were diversely affected. Some wished
themselves in England again, others fell on weeping, fancying their own
misery in what they saw in others; other some pitying the distress they saw in
their friends, -in a word, all were full of sadness, only some of their old
friends rejoiced to see them, and that it was no worse with them, for they
could not expect it should be better, and now hoped they should enjoy better
days together. And truly it was no marvel they should be thus affected, for
they were in a very low condition, both in respect of food and clothing at that
time.’” p. 3 The Jenny Book
John and Sarah Jenny had a total of 6 children. #5 John who died before
turning age 30 and #6 Susanna were born in the Plymouth Colony. Samuel
was the oldest. p. 24 The Jenny Book. Samuel who was born about 1617 as
the first of 6 children of John and Sarah (Carey) Jenny died around 1692.
Samuel married Sarah Wood. They had 3 children, and she died in 1654.
Then Samuel married Anne Lettice, and they had 6 children. One was a boy
named Lettice. Samuel and the Jenny family were wealthy and substantial
land owners, but had to escape as refugees during the King Philip’s War
when all buildings in Dartmouth were devastated. After the War Samuel
returned to Dartmouth, rebuilt the family house, and recovered financially.
Lettice and his wife had 12 children, the first being Cornelius. p. 41 The
Jenny Book. The widow of Lettice lived to be age 95 and is buried in the
Acushnet Cemetery in MA.
Cornelius was married twice. He had 11 children by his first wife who
then died, and then 7 more children by his second wife. Henry was the first
of these 7 children born to the second wife.
Hiram was descended from Henry Jennings who was born in Dartmouth,
MA in 1746. His name was Jenney, but by the time he died in Sept. 1816
near Rochester, NY, he had changed his name to Jennings. He is the first of
the family to be buried in Union Hill Cemetery on Ridge Road east of
Rochester near Ontario, NY. “Henry lived in Dartmouth until about 1795 and
served in the Massachusetts Militia, 2nd Bristol Co., Regiment, as 2nd
Lieutenant in 1776, a Lieutenant in 1777 and as a Captain in 1779. The
census of 1800 shows Henry Jennings as head of household in Milton,
Saratoga County, NY. p. 63.
The Jenny Book, was first started by Bertha Clark, then expanded by
Susan C. Tufts and Herman Winslow Jennings, and then edited by Judith
Jenney Gurney. Judith Jenney Gurney, The Jenny Book, (Baltimore,
Maryland: Gateway Press, Inc., 1995)
In the almost 200 years between when the Jenny family landed on the
shores of America until they became the Jennings family near Rochester,
New York, life had changed very little. Still there was no indoor plumbing,
paved roads, technology or medical solutions to disease. Families were
large, and women often died while giving birth to children. People endured
many hardships. Family members supported each other, and friends and
neighbors. Americans, by necessity, were very charitable. The hardships
gave birth to two of America’s greatest values.
The first, which was the reason people left England for America, was
freedom to pursue their own dreams. Americans today still believe that is
their God-given right. The second was generosity. Back in the beginning of
America people helped each other, and today America’s generosity to the
rest of the world surpasses all other countries in the world combined.
Henry and Hiram knew their ancestors were among the first to settle in
America and serve in the American Revolution. That pride carried down
through subsequent generations, including to Asa K. Jennings (b. 1877) and
Asa W. Jennings (b. 1907).
Henry (b. 1746) and his wife Phebe had 6 children. One died at age 3, and
twins died 12 days after birth. The 6th was also a Henry who was born about
1777. He married Maribah Dexter, and they had 6 children. A son was Asa
Kent, known as “Squire,” the father of Hiram. Squire was born 1799 and
died in 1884 at age 85. The name Asa was used generation after generation.
The name comes from King Asa in the Book of Kings in the Bible. His wife
was Celecta Billings.
Records left by Celecta describe early Rochester. There were “a number
of Indians living not far from Webster at the time. Then too she remembers
that when a settler had a grist to be ground into feed and flour of their taking
it overland to Oswego but later an enterprising settler conceived the idea of
building a mill on the banks of the Genesee River near to where the Falls
were and thus have a mill of water power, and this with the subsequent
farseeing settlers who conceived the idea of having a store where goods and
groceries could be bought was the beginning of what is now the city of
Rochester. Due to the fact that where the mill and stores were located was
low land and consequently malaria infected, many of the settlers did not care
to live there, but later as conditions bettered it began to be settled. However
this low place can be observed in Main Street of Rochester where the street
crosses the river although the river is bridged and is not visible from the
street as the river is built over.” Celecta did not know that malaria is a
tropical disease that was most unlikely after a winter in Rochester.
When Hiram married Emma Cary, he married into a family equally proud
to be among the first to settle in America and serve in the American
Revolutionary War.
The Cary Family in the Plymouth Colony
Emma Cary (spelled Carey after 1850) Jennings was descended from John
Cary, the Plymouth Pilgrim. The Plymouth Colony, located about 25 miles
south of Boston, Massachusetts, was settled by passengers from the ship
Mayflower. The military leader of the Colony was Myles Standish, a former
English military officer.
John Cary was from Bristol, England where he was born in 1610. “He
was one of a family of eight sons and two daughters. When a youth he was
sent by his father to France to be educated, and while there his father died.
On returning home he differed with his brothers about the settlement of the
estate. He compromised by receiving one hundred pounds as his portion, and
immediately sailed for America” in 1634.* p. 4
The Cary Family in America, by Henry Grosvenor Cary, published by
Rev. Seth Cooley Cary, Dorchester Center, Boston, 1907.
Samuel F. Cary, author of “Cary Memorials” wrote “Enough is known to
enable me to state that in each generation there have been wise and good
men. A large proportion of them were professors of the Christian religion,
and possessed the traits peculiar to the early settlers of New England. The
physical, intellectual, moral and social characteristics, however modified by
marriage, occupation, etc., have been remarkably preserved. As a race they
have been physically above the common stature, stout, muscular, dark hair
and eyes, short necks, great powers of endurance, great tenacity to life, and
living to more than the ordinary age.
“Their mental constitutions have been characterized by strength rather than
brilliancy, fixedness of purpose, persistency of opinion, habit and pursuit.
“The larger number have been farmers; very few in any generation have
accumulated great wealth, none have been mendicants (member of religious
order forbidden to own property who lived on charitable donations), and, so
far as can be ascertained, not one has been convicted of crime.”
Seth C. Cary, author of John Cary The Plymouth Pilgrim wrote in the
Preface of his book:
“It is rare to find a man who gathered to himself so much of good, and then
to send down through family life, cleaner morals, higher ideals, and a more
pervasive personality. He was quiet yet firm; true and aggressive, persistent
and successful. He was one who could afford ‘to labor and to wait.’”
As the reader learns more about Asa K. Jennings, the man who saved the
Greeks, Armenians and Jews from the holocaust of Smyrna, Turkey, and
helped to put Turkey on the road of peace and prosperity, the description of
John Cary matches Asa K. Jennings perfectly.
John Cary “first joined the Plymouth Colony. In 1649 he, with others,
purchased of Ousamequin, afterwards known as Massasoit, chief of the
Pockanocket Indians, a tract of land about fourteen miles square, embracing
what is now the Bridgewaters. This tract was known as Satucket. The deed
was made out to Miles Standish and two others, as trustees in behalf of John
Cary and fifty-three others. The original is preserved by the old Bridgewater
Historical Society, West Bridgewater, Massachusetts” * p. 5 The Cary
Family in America by Henry Grosvenor Cary, published by Rev. Seth
Cooley Cary, Boston, 1907.
The purchase price was:
7 coats, a yard and a half in a coat
9 hatchets
8 hoes
20 knives
4 moose skins
10 yards and a half of cotton
“The land was divided into fifty-four parts, and assigned by lots. John
Cary drew a tract one mile wide by seven miles long on the northern
boundary. This tract embraced what is now the city of Brockton.” The
greatest elevation of the land in Brocton is Cary Hill where several Cary
families lived.
John was chosen in 1656 as constable of Bridgewater, the first and only
officer elected at that time. The office of constable was second only to that of
governor. The constable was the only officer in the town whose duty it was
to execute the laws, and his power was almost absolute. He could even
arrest on suspicion ‘without precept,’ a power scarcely allowed at the
present day to the chief magistrate of a nation or state. There were no sheriffs
in those days.
“John was elected town clerk the next year, 1657, and held the office till
he died in 1681, a period of twenty-four years.
“He was prominent among his fellows, was intelligent, well educated and
public spirited. He taught the first class in Latin in the Colony.” p. 7.
“Cotton Mather wrote: ‘The first settlers of Bridgewater were a set of
people who made religion their main interest. Remarkable was the fate of
Bridgewater, a most praying and pious town; seated in the very midst of the
war (King Philip’s), that, although they were often assaulted by formidable
numbers of their enemies, yet in all their sharp assaults never lost one of its
inhabitants, old or young.” The opinion was that their piety shielded them
from savage cruelty.” p. 9.
John Cary died in 1681 at age 71. His wife died the year before. They had
12 children and 7 grandchildren.
Emma Carey was the 9th generation of the John Cary family. All were
prominent in church affairs, and had a lot of children. The 2nd generation
after John Cary was his son also a John Cary. He had 11 children. The 3rd
generation, Joseph Cary, had 6 children. He moved to Norwich, Connecticut,
where he “took position with the first men of the town in civil and
ecclesiastical affairs, and was chosen repeatedly to serve in the most
important offices, civil, military and religious; was one of the original
members of the First Congregational Church in Windham”* p. 66 John Cary
The Plymouth Pilgrim where he was a Deacon until his death. The 4th
generation, Jabez Cary and his wife had 8 children. The 5th generation was
Joseph Cary and his wife who had 12 children, the 12th being Asa. The
family moved from Connecticut to Williamsburg, Massachusetts, about 1765
where he died.
The 6th generation was Joseph Cary who with his wife Rachel Thompson
(b. 1760) had 10 children. They moved with his Father and family also to
Williamsburg, MA, but later moved to Ontario, Wayne Co., NY where she
died at age 72 in 1831. He died in 1848 at the age of 90. He was married
twice, and his second wife Mary Maine died 3 years later at age 73. He was
Chaplain in the Revolution. They are all buried in the Ontario Center
Cemetery. Joseph was a Private in the American Revolutionary War in the 2nd
Regiment of the Dutchess County, NY, Militia. The first tax roll ever for the
region west of the Genesee River in Monroe County dated October 6, 1800,
showed Joseph Cary having an estate valued at $948 on which he paid a tax
of $1.61. He served as Overseer of Highways. Roads were not paved in
those days, and people traveled on foot, horseback or in a carriage.
The 7th generation was also Joseph Cary, born in 1784. He married
Freelove Fuller in 1803 and moved to Ontario, NY, where he died in 1872 at
age 88. Joseph and Freelove had 3 children in Stowe, Vermont, before
moving to Ontario. One was Lyman, the 8th generation, born in 1807, who
was Father of Emma Cary. They are buried in the Ontario Center Cemetery.
Lyman married Sarah Story in 1833 and died July 15, 1870. Lyman and
Sarah had 6 children. The oldest Stephen M. Carey, born in 1837, died as a
sailor in the U.S. Navy during battle on the Potomac River outside
Washington, D.C. He was on the USS Dragon taking soundings with a weight
on the end of a string to make sure the ship did not go aground. At the same
time the enemy was trying to shoot him. He dropped his pistol which went off
killing him. He is buried in Congressional Cemetery in Southeast
Washington, D.C.
Stephen enlisted in the Navy on Sept. 15, 1861, two days after his brother
Andrew for a term of three years. At age 27 Stephen was described on the
muster roll as 5’7” tall with blue eyes, light hair and fair complexion. At the
time of his enlistment Stephen was listed as 5’7”. Andrew was listed as
4’10”. Stephen previously served on the USS North Carolina and USS Isaac
Smith. He was promoted for bravery on the Isaac Smith according to his
sister Emma. Stephen is shown in a photo with a sword which Emma
inherited and then gave to Asa W. Jennings upon his graduation from high
school. After AWJ died, the sword was passed on to his older son Asa K.
Jennings (b. 1937) who like his younger brother, the Author, served in the
U.S. Navy.
The second child was Oren, born 1845, died in 1915 as a result of being
hit by an inter-urban trolley car. He was deaf, and walked right in front of the
car and was hit from behind. He is buried in the Ontario Cemetery. He had
served in the Union Army, Company B, 9 NY H. Artillery.
The third child, Andrew, was born in 1846, and served as a cabin boy in
the U.S. Navy on the same ships with his brother while only age 16. He was
discharged Sept. 12, 1864, in Washington, District of Columbia, before the
War ended, but exactly three years after his enlistment. He moved to
Tennessee, then Kentucky, and finally Arkansas in 1870 where he was a
farmer. He was then 5’4” and weighed 115 pounds. He had a 5 point star and
letters AC on his left arm, and a portrait of a woman on his right arm. He
died in Star City, Arkansas, in 1904 without ever returning home to Ontario,
New York. He married twice, and had two children. He collected a Civil
War pension until his death. His last payment was $8. His second wife
collected a widow’s pension from his Civil War service. Her last payment
was $30 in 1928.
The 4th child Calven served in the U.S. Army, and stayed in the South after
the Civil War. The 5th child, Prudence, was a daughter who died at age 2 in
1850. The 6th child was Emma Carey Jennings after whom the Author’s
daughter Carey Jennings Wintroub is named.
Emma Carey Jennings was born Oct 6, 1851, in Ontario, New York,
married Hiram on June 23, 1870, and then had 6 children. She died on Feb.
15, 1936, in Cortland, New York, from an “acute dilatation of heart”
according to the death certificate. She is buried in the Union Hill Cemetery in
Webster, New York.
The 6 children were Lewis I. (1873-1967), Asa Kent (1877-1933), Edith
Jennings Webster (1880-1974), Hiram Wallace, twins Ruth Jennings Haynes
and Raymond Elmer. Edith married a Methodist minister Rev. Elmer
Webster. Hiram Wallace was a high school athletic coach who coached Billy
Martin who later played for the New York Yankees. Ruth married Wyman
Haynes, had a daughter Eleanor and operated a bakery first in Mohawk and
then in Richfield Springs, New York. Ruth was a small woman like her sister
Edith, but married to a large man Wyman. When she was unable to deliver
Eleanor, the doctor put forceps on Eleanor’s head and his foot on the table to
pull Eleanor out. As a result of the damage to Eleanor, she never left home
and died at home at age 21. She was a living vegetable. Raymond Elmer died
at two years and nine months old from spinal meningitis.
Emma attended school at the Walworth Academy where she qualified for
teaching school. She also was a Free Methodist. Free Methodists followed
the same theology of John Wesley as Methodists who were not part of the
“Free” movement. Among the few differences between Free Methodists and
Methodists was the Free Methodists declared that pews in church were free
so the poor will not be kept out or discriminated against. Renting a pew in
the Methodist Church was in effect tithing. Free Methodists declared on
behalf of human freedom, upholding the right of every person to be free,
denying the right of anyone to hold slaves. The Free Methodists believed in a
disciplined, simple lifestyle. They were free from materialism so they could
help the poor. Becoming rich or wealthy was never an objective in the
family. Life was not about enriching themselves as it is for so many people
today.
Life on the Farm
Many people in those days recorded the events of their daily lives in a
diary, and significant events were posted in the family Bible. AKJ in 1895
when he was age 18 recorded the routine of his life. Typical Spring entries:
Mon. April 1, 1895: rained all day. Froze as fast as it fell. Stayed at home
and made berry boxes.
Tues. April 2, 1895: fair (weather). Worked around home in forenoon. In
after noon went up to Jimmie Campbell’s and got Betsy (horse) shod in
front,
Fri. April 5, 1895: worked around home in forenoon until about 10
o’clock. Then went and shoveled snow on Storey Avenue until noon. In
afternoon shoveled snow on roads, in evening took Mother over to Wm
Ray’s to prayer meeting and I went to Sam Vandy’s to see about getting
some hay. Went from there to Elis. Allen’s and stayed there until church.
When prayer meeting was out, got Mother and came home.
Sun. April 7, 1895: In forenoon went to Sunday school. At 1 o’clock went
to Will Bilgar’s baby’s funeral. That evening went to bury.
Mon. April 8, 1895: forenoon rain. Afternoon pleasant. In forenoon made
berry boxes. In afternoon trimmed trees. In evening went over to church.
Tues. April 9, 1895: Rained all day. In forenoon took children to school.
Fixed steps, etc. In after-noon made berry boxes. Got children. In evening
played on organ and sung.
Wed. April 10, 1895: pleasant but cold and windy. Forenoon made berry
boxes and trimmed trees. After noon cut wood. In evening took Mother
over to church and I went over to Stella Turnow. Edith Jennings came
home with Father from city. Edith Rose is to come on 11 o’clock train
tomorrow.
Fri. April 12, 1895: fair. Toward evening began to rain. Went out to the
barn and found new calf and fifteen little pigs. Trimmed trees and sawed
wood. In evening went to Union Hill to mail letter. Saw about getting me
new buggy. Jake Oline rode down from Hill with me.
Sat. April 13, 1895: Fog and mist. Loaded shells for gun. Went down to
Henry Reed’s on John Gerwell farm. Took my gun along. Shot hen hawk,
etc. Went to Webster corners for mail in evening.
Sun. April 14, 1895: Pleasant. Went to burg church morning and evening.
In afternoon stayed at home and read.
Tues. April 16, 1895: cloudy, cold west wind. Chopped wood. In the
afternoon dug out beets and carrots and drawed them up to the barn. Major
cat (worth $10.00) caught in neighborhood. Ten mice which were as large
as rats as they had been feasting on carrots and beets all winter. When we
had them all caught he had a fit of the worst sort, stiffened out and flung
around, blood and froth ran out of his mouth. At last came out of it all right
in about 10 minutes.
The name of the neighbor who had the seizure is not mentioned in the
diary.
Wed. April 17, 1895: Went out to Rochester. Took some cabbage, apples
and eggs. Sold like hot cakes. Brought home some coke and hat boxes.
Saw (mentions names of friends)
Thurs. April 18, 1895: Trimmed trees in forenoon. In afternoon went down
to Henry Reed’s to saw down trees in woods by lakeshore. In evening
went to the Hill to see about harness and carriage.
Fri. April 19, 1895: Very pleasant. Trimmed trees until noon. After dinner
went to Hill. Bought new buggy $65.00 and new single harness $18.00.
Went to Webster and got my hair cut.
Tues. April 23, 1895: Fair. Drawed manure in fore-noon. Started to plow
in afternoon. I dug out black cap plants. (raspberries)
Typical summer entries:
Mon. June 25, 1895: fair. Cultivated all day. The folks picked
strawberries.
Wed. June 26, 1895: cloudy. Went to Rochester with berries 272 quarts @
7 cents.
Thurs. June 27, 1895: fair. Cultivated all day.
Life was hard, and people by the standards of today were poor, but they
were rich in spirit with values that were based on a hard life and Christian
values. Asa K. Jennings, and his family, took these to Turkey to save the
many people who could not save themselves. Service to others is an honor.