10. The Future

work. It is expected that the refugees now in Syria will remain there until
spring as they are in no danger.
The reporter asked, ‘You declared that you are principally interested in the
orphans? Is it possible for you to supply us with some information
concerning their future?’
I have taken the responsibility of rescuing and transporting to Greece all
the Pontus orphans, replied Mr. Jennings. They will be established here in
provisional orphanages at the expense of the American Near East Relief. As
regards the future education and support of these children, the American
nation will take care of them through Major C. D. Morris, Director, Near
East Relief, who is in direct touch with the Greek Government in regard to
this matter of future education and support. You can obtain from him all the
further information you may desire.
Jennings, it was reported, was planning to leave shortly for Smyrna.
’Yes,’ said Mr. Jennings, ‘but I would prefer that should not ask me the
object of my voyage. I can only say this much, that important negotiations
are now under way concerning the release of all political and military
prisoners. I hope that these negotiations will succeed. The release of the
prisoners, or better still the exchange between Greece and Turkey is in
charge of the American YMCA, and this Association is carrying on
separate negotiations for all matters regarding the welfare of prisoners. Its
work is entirely separate from the official work of the Lausanne
conference. As for my own part in this work, I shall do all in my power to
enable this exchange to begin at the earliest possible date.
“What can you say of the relations between America and Greece, and your
impressions of the present situation in Greece,’ asked the reporter.
‘I am very much pleased with the efforts which Greece is making,’ said
Mr. Jennings. ‘The Government has undertaken faithfully and honorably the
work of the present difficult times in Greece. I have observed with
pleasure that the Greek people have accepted with confidence their new
government. Otherwise, I could not have shown the interest which I am
now showing in the refugee work. And I can also say that the American
nation desires to help Greece, and that relations between the two countries
will be strengthened in the future by the bonds of sympathy which are now
being established.’
From the report Asa K. Jennings wrote on April 8, 1923, to D. A. Davis of
the YMCA in Geneva:
After the evacuation of Smyrna and other nearby coast towns, I went to
Athens to interview the new revolutionary government with reference to
further distribution of refugees and their care. While directing the shipping
from Mitylene I had also organized a relief committee. The Near East
Relief and American Women’s Hospital and the YMCA had sent
representatives there. Doctor M. E. Elliott, the director of the AWH
(American Women’s Hospital). came personally as the need at Mitylene at
that time was considered greatest of all. Dr. Elliott accompanied me on my
trip to Athens to interview the government.
The government urged us to make our headquarters, Athens, and referred to
us a call for help that had come from Nakri and Adalia. The YMCA at
Athens had first received the appeal but the government could offer no
solution. I promised the government that if they would send ships I would
ask our Navy if we could not send Destroyers to escort them into the
Turkish ports. On these conditions the Greek government prepared three
ships, and I asked the SNO (Senior Naval Officer). at Smyrna, to have a
Destroyer meet them off the port of Rhodes. This was done.
Later on we received calls for help from Mersin and the necessity for a
Destroyer to be located at both Athens and Mersin seemed apparent if we
were to keep in touch with the situation and continue our service in
connection with the evacuation of refugees. This was the intention of
Admiral Bristol, so he ordered a Destroyer stationed at these ports as well
as at Smyrna.
He also especially requested that I continue my activities in the Near East
and so requested your office. After we had ships and Destroyers caring for
the refugees calling to us from Southern Anatolian Coast, we also received
calls from the Black Sea. The Greek government asked me what we could
do to assist them there.
I made a trip to Constantinople and decided after a talk with Admiral
Bristol and others to take Greek ships to Constantinople and if possible
secure consent of the Turkish government to take them through into the
Black Sea. Failing in that, load them with refugees who had already come
down from Pontus and were waiting for ships. We brought these ships to
Constantinople, but the Turks refused to allow them to proceed to the
Black Sea. So we secured ships under British flag, which the Greek
government chartered and I accompanied in order to bring away the most
needy cases. Meanwhile the Pontus refugees in Constantinople were
embarked.
The Navy had sometimes two and three Destroyers in the Black Sea in
order to help relieve the situation. We afterwards did secure consent from
Turkish authorities to take Greek ships, escorted by American Destroyers
into the Black Sea, but unfortunately the Greek government had changed
their attitude with reference to receiving any more refugees from Asa
Minor, and insisted on the Turks keeping them as they, the Greeks, claimed
they had received already more than one million refugees since the Smyrna
disaster, an increase of 20% of their population, and that it was impossible
for them to receive more.
As the American Red Cross was assisting in the feeding in Greece, so they
asked the Near East Relief to feed and care for the needy refugees in
Turkey, and looked to us to see that the refugees were not molested. In all
this endeavor, the American Navy has been giving the closest sort of
cooperation as I have shown. Whatever I have been able to do has been
due almost entirely to the Navy, of whom I have never yet made a request
that has not been granted.
The story of the conditions of the refugees is another story, as is also that
of the exchange of prisoners and their condition. At the present time I am
assisting the commission for the exchange of Turkish and Greek prisoners
in which again the Navy is highly cooperative.
The Turkish government offered to give the Greeks one Greek prisoner of
war (POW) for each Turk who was a POW of the Greeks. The problem was
Turkey had lots of Greeks as POWs, but Greece had few Turks as POWs.
Asa simply agreed. He knew that trying to bargain or argue with the Turks
would only annoy them and not produce any positive results. They dig their
heels in like they are defending Gallipoli again. That has been part of the
Turkish persona until today. Instead, again Asa relied on the U.S. Navy. He
had the Navy transport the Greeks who were POWs to Greece and the Turks
who were POWs to Turkey in such a way that the Turkish government could
not keep count.
The commission has told both the Greek and Turkish authorities that they
owe a great deal to our assistance and the cooperation of our Navy. I might
add that personally I have always been used exceedingly well by the
Turkish authorities whenever it has been necessary for me to return to
Turkey, which has been several times since the occupation of Smyrna. It is
needless to say that the Greek government has been especially courteous to
me. It has been my plan to work in close cooperation with the American
Red Cross, Near East Relief, American Women’s Hospital, and other
organizations, as well as the Turkish and Greek governments. Unofficially,
representing our own government, and officially, the International
Committee of the YMCA
The Turkish government cooperated, because those were the instructions
of Mustafa Kemal. His objective of “Turkey for the Turks” was being
achieved. The Greeks cooperated, despite all the political turmoil, because
of the enormous popularity of Asa K. Jennings in Greece. Others like Rear
Admiral Mark Bristol, Consul General George Horton, and the head of the
American’s Women’s Hospital tried to take credit for the rescue, but the
Greek people knew differently.
Asa K. Jennings was very distinctive in appearance due to the hunchback,
mode of dress and hat. Wherever he went, people knew who he was. When
he walked down the streets of Greece people would kneel as he approached
as though the Host was being brought down the street. People wanted to kiss
his hand and feet. They were grateful for being saved. Asa, a humble man,
was embarrassed.
On March 12, 1923, Dr. Wilfred Post, medical director of the Near East
Relief in Constantinople wrote the following report:
The Greek and Armenian refugees in Constantinople probably number
about thirty thousand; the Armenians have been here for a long time and by
this time are tolerably well taken care of; but the plight of the 25,000
Greek refugees is becoming daily more pitiful. The location of the camps
and the general conditions under which the people are living have been
more or less public in the press, but the sanitary aspect of the whole
problem has been given insufficient prominence, nor has any effective
remedy been suggested.
The majority of the Greek refugees arrived here already in a most
wretched condition. They are forced, according to their own statement, to
choose between deportation to the far interior of Asia Minor among hostile
tribes, or exile to a foreign land. In either case it meant leaving their homes
in midwinter, hasty flight and arduous travel for days or weeks, and danger
and terror all the time. Small wonder then that these wretched people, for
the most part ignorant villagers, started on their long journey of exile with
morale thoroughly broken and feel prey all the more readily to small pox,
typhus, and other diseases which always make their appearance under such
conditions.
Many died on the journey to the sea, many more in the filthy and crowded
ships. When they were finally landed in Constantinople, comfortable
quarters and good food might have saved many, but instead they were
cramped into barn like buildings insufficient to house half their number,
and for the most part received nothing but the relief ration of a limited
amount of bread and in some cases one dole of soup daily.
The Turkish commandant of Selimie told me he had received instructions
to prepare for the reception of 3,000, and that he was then forced to
receive not less than 10,000. Constantinople is the last place in the world
fitted to receive and care for a large influx of refugees, frequent fires and
consequent congestion of population together with the presence of many
thousands of earlier exiles, made this recent addition to the population a
veritable calamity.
In addition to the bad condition on land, there are ships in the harbor still
crowded with refugees, for whom there is no place in the city, and no
possibility of transporting to Greece. I have first-hand knowledge of
conditions on these ships, having recently convoyed 3,000 people to
Greece on a cargo boat that should not have attempted to carry more than
1,000. I saw cases of smallpox typhoid, dysentery, pneumonia and typhus
all lying in a huddled heap together. There was no room to separate them.
Bathing was out of the question and medical care was hardly worthwhile.
On a similar ship where the people were kept on board three weeks, 200
died out of 2,000; it was a veritable ‘Black hole of Calcutta’.
This state of affairs is not only an outrage on humanity, but a serious
menace to the health of the whole Near East. Quarantine is ineffective, and
the presence of so many sick persons under impossible conditions is bound
to scatter infection. The filth and offal (the entrails and internal organs of
an animal used as food; refuse or waste material; decomposing animal
flesh) thrown from disease-laden ships is devoured by fish which is then
eaten by the people of the city. The fishermen are infected by handling the
fish. Filthy rags and garments are washed ashore constantly. Even the
strictest quarantine calls for a certain amount of communication between
the ships and the shore.
On land the chances of infection are still greater. For example, 500 people
are crowded into a filthy stable with mud floors outside the Selemlie
barracks; most of them are insufficiently clothed and lying either on the
bare ground or on thin pallets or quilting or sacking. On one such quilt
there were seven people, all ill with typhus or dysentery. Two days later
there were only three left; two days later only one; and the last time I was
there, this last unfortunate has passed.
All this time, the rest of the refugees were cooking and eating and living
around the group. As one after the other died, their bodies are carried
jostling thought he crowd to the dead cart, which then moved on until it
was full; then it jogged its way through the streets of Scutari to the edge of
the town where the bodies were dumped unceremoniously into a long pit.
Fly time is coming, when the camps and their great heaps of filth will
become foci of contagion, and when cholera and dysentery are specially to
be feared.
Under present conditions no satisfactory sanitary work is possible. With
the present death rate, the total number of refugees will be reduced half the
number within a few months.
If the new Turkish customs regulations are put into effect, their prohibitive
tariffs on flour, milk, etc. will make further relief work impossible. All we
have been able to accomplish thus far is to vaccinate and feed the refugees,
and bathe as far as facilities can be provided. Thanks to strenuous
representations to the Turkish authorities, we have recently obtained
additional space enough for a 100-bed hospital, where we can isolate the
worst cases of smallpox and typhus.
The best solution of the problem would seem to be to establish at once in
Greece a vast refugee camp similar to that which the British authorities at
Bakuba near Baghdad for 50,000 refugees who came from the Urumia
region in 1918. Until such a place is established for this the Allies should
insist upon something more than the stereotyped official assurances. The
first detachments of refugees taken to such a camp should be from
Constantinople, and after these have been removed there should be no
further landing of refugees in this city, at least under present conditions.
At present the Turkish government has done nothing whatever for the
refugees except to supply insufficient and inadequate housing space. It has
given no food, medicines, clothing or fuel. The explanation given by
Turkish officials is that these people are essentially disloyal, and that the
permission given them to depart is a great act of clemency. It is clemency
to take away from their fertile lands and vineyards these people, whose
ancestors have lived in Anatolia for many centuries and are most of them
so ignorant as hardly to know whether there is a world outside of Anatolia,
and send them to Greece?
Greece is already overburdened; the Constantinople relief committees are
overwhelmed; the hospitals are overcrowded. The present situation is an
increasing disgrace upon the name of civilization and a menace to the
health of the Near East.
Dr. Post’s report is testimony to Man’s Inhumanity to Man.
One can only describe the politicians in Greece who set in motion these
horrible tragedies as ego driven, ignorant fools. The Greek people need to
reconsider who they put into government positions.
THE FUTURE
Albert Einstein said:
“Insanity: doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different
results.”
He also said:
“The only source of knowledge is experience.”
N
ow we know by what measures leaders in government must be measured.
The problems in Greece today one could say started with the Ottoman
Turkish occupation. The Ottomans left Greece almost 200 years ago, and the
Turkish people today are not Ottomans. Responsibility for the problems of
Greece today rests with the Greeks, and only the Greeks. Greece is in a very
sad state, and the Greek people are suffering.
The Greek politicians want to continue to do what they have done since the
beginning of the Greek Revolution in1821. They want to live off of the
income of Europe rather than developing their own economic engine. They
have taught the Greek people to believe they are entitled to a superior
standard of living without earning everything they have. The Greek
politicians have been and are dishonest with the Greek people. It is time for
the truth in Greece, as difficult as that will be to hear. True to the words of
Einstein, the politicians will not change, and the Greek people will continue
to suffer, except the suffering will get worse. Recovery by the hands of the
Greek people will be very, very difficult and painful. Greece needs help.
That help must come from an outstanding leader who puts his country first
and is not complicit with the politicians.
Help must not be given to the Greek Government. History tells us what the
Government will do with any help it receives. Corruption and
mismanagement will render any help useless to the Greek citizen.
The suffering of the Greek people is an awesome opportunity for Turkey to
re-write history. Einstein teaches us the Turkish leadership of today will
remain unenlightened and devoid of imagination and generosity. The
politicians in Turkey would rather spend their time fighting for control over
the political structure of Turkey than demonstrating great leadership.
The Turkish leaders, instead, should identify the Turkish businesses that
would make good partners with Greek businesses. The Greek businesses
would then have banking support, new markets, and a friend when in need.
The Turkish businesses would likewise benefit. The Turkish Government
could provide guarantees to loans to Greek businesses that partner with
Turkish businesses. There are many more ways Turkey could help the Greek
economy and people without lending money to the Greek government. Those
personal friendships created by working together are the best way to erase
the hatred of Turks from the Greek DNA.
Such a proposal appears more reasonable when comparing the sizes of the
two populations and two economies when measured by gross domestic
product. The Turkish economy is much larger and stronger. Turkey does not
have to replace the Greek economy. All that is required is sufficient help to
give the Greeks an economic boost so that people go back to work and start
supporting themselves.
If the Turkish government were to reach out to help the Greek people get
off their knees, the world would know that the Turkish Reformation, begun by
Gazi and President Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, was once again underway.
In recent years, Turkey has been focused on large domestic projects funded
significantly by debt to create employment and raise Turkish wages. The
politicians in Turkey have received support from the electorate for that effort.
At the same time, human rights have suffered. Judges and police have been
fired and military officers put in jail. The heavy hand of government looks
like the acts one would expect from a nervous, insecure dictator. And these
acts are against Turkish Muslims. Non-Muslim Turkish citizens feel even
more at risk, such as the few ethnic Greek and Jewish people left in Turkey.
The Ecumenical Patriarch of the Eastern Orthodox Church located in Istanbul
stated on television that he expects to be crucified by the government.
The political leaders are insensitive to the minorities of Turkey. That is in
sharp contrast to the actions of President Ataturk who made women citizens
equal to men, mandated free education, and made so much social progress
that the world stands in awe. Turkey has that opportunity again by
recognizing that Greeks also are human. Sensitivity can be shown by
following the example of the Italians who created a sovereign territory we
know as the Vatican. The new sovereign state should be the Rum where the
Ecumenical Patriarch and his staff reside in Istanbul, and that sovereign state
should be protected, with pride, by the Turkish authorities. Then Halki could
be opened again as a teaching institution of the Eastern Orthodox Church
without violating the religious education laws of Turkey. Halki would have
the same legal status as a foreign consulate. Turkey should return the Hagia
Sophia to the Church to be the Church it was designed to be rather than the
museum it is now. The cost to Turkey would be zero. The benefits, huge.
Tourism would boom. The world would know the Turkish Reformation
continues, and Turkey would be accepted as a member of the European
Union. The Turks should be very proud to be the protector of one of the
major religions of the world rather than a country that might crucify the
leader of that Church. The Turkish leaders just don’t get it.
Cyprus typifies the problems between Greeks and Turks. Greece and
Greek Cyprus must publicly renounce The Megali Idea and enosis. The core
problem is the Greek Cypriots, supported by Greece, do not want to extend
the same rights to the minority Turkish Cypriots that are extended to Greek
Cypriots. Greece must support equal rights for all Cypriots. This sounds
simple, but Turkey, the Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots are not listening.
They only listen to the person they see in the mirror in the morning. There has
been no effort to develop options.
I developed options and contacted the Turks, Turkish Cypriots and Greek
Cypriots repeatedly in an attempt to make progress. This is an example of
what could be done. It is also testimony to the stupidity of those leaders.
I visited the Turkish Consul General to the U.N. in New York City, Mr. M.
Levent Bilgen. I presented my credentials, the mantle of my Grandfather and
Father. I had the Consul General hold the worry beads of Gazi Mustafa
Kemal while looking at a photograph of Turkey’s greatest leader, a
photograph that was signed Gazi M. Kemal with a personal note to Asa K.
Jennings. I gave the Consul General a copy of the book The Saga of a
Friendship: Asa Kent Jennings and The American Friends of Turkey
authored by a Turkish citizen. Then I presented a proposal for reconciliation
in Cyprus. The Consul General listened without interruption and was most
cordial. Then he made a speech that suggested either he did not hear what I
said or did not care what I said. He took no action on behalf of humanity. I
might as well have been talking to a potted plant.
The Consul General is not free to do as he pleases. His reaction reflects
the Foreign Ministry in Ankara. I have also written to the Foreign Minister,
who later became Prime Minister, and had the letter introduced by a member
of the Turkish media in Ankara who has access to the Foreign Ministry. The
result was the same. There is no interest in creative ideas or solutions. By
contrast, my Grandfather appeared at the office of Mustafa Kemal, got a
meeting with the General, and then an agreement that saved 1,250,000 people
from death and turned Turkey into the peaceful country that it is today. The
highest government officials today in Turkey, Greece and the United States
are no equal to the Gazi.
In my communications with the Turkish Cypriot government of Dr. Dervis
Eroglu I was informed that there would be an agreement with the Greek
Cypriots when the Greek Cypriots agree to all the terms of the Turkish
Cypriots. Those same Turkish Cypriots should try that approach with their
wives and see how far they get. In public, I would expect the politicians
involved would deny what I reported. However, deny and lie are what
politicians do. It is their trade craft.
The Turkish Cypriots are trying to negotiate every issue and term to the
letter with the Greek Cypriots. The Greek Cypriots are led by President
Anastasiades, a skilled Byzantine negotiator. The Turkish Cypriots are
clueless what President Anastasiades is doing to them. To make matters
worse for the Turkish Cypriots, they are spending their energy on any and
everyone around the world who will listen that their case is just. If an
agreement is reached, the agreement will be put to a vote in both the Turkish
and Greek Cypriot populations. That is what happened to the Annan Plan.
Kofi Annan, then Secretary General of the United Nations, worked very
hard to get an agreement. The Turkish Cypriot people were advised by their
leaders, and Turkey, to support the Plan. They did. The Archbishop of the
Greek Cypriots and other Greek Cypriot leaders opposed the Plan. The
Greek Cypriots voted by a margin of 60% against the Plan. Recent polls
show that 60% of the Greek Cypriots still oppose any unification with the
Turkish Cypriots. So no progress has been made despite all that has been
done.
President Anastasiades knows all this. He can spend months and longer
dancing around with the Turkish Cypriot leaders knowing that in the end the
Greek Cypriot citizens will vote the agreement down. He holds the trump
card. The Turkish Cypriot leaders do not understand this basic fact. President
Anastasiades is letting the Turkish Cypriots defeat themselves. However, if
the Turkish Cypriots would execute a plan such as I have proposed, the
Greek Cypriot people would support an agreement. President Anastasiades
is the representative of the Greek Cypriot people, and he will do what they
want and not what he personally thinks is best for them.
Einstein is right. The Turkish Cypriots should be focused on how to get
more than 50% of Greek Cypriots to vote for an agreement. All the foreign
leaders the Turkish Cypriot politicians are spending their time with do not
vote in Cyprus and are a waste of time and precious resources. I have
pointed all this out to the Turkish Consul General and Dr. Eroglu’s
government and his successor President Mustafa Akinci.
The Turkish Cypriots must have the support of the Archbishop and other
religious leaders. The religious leaders have shown signs of possibly
changing to support an agreement. With respect to the Archbishop, I
proposed:
1. Publicly invite the Archbishop to conduct more church services in the
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Is that taking a big risk for
the Turkish Cypriots to make that offer? They did not make the offer.
2. Publicly announce the building of a new Lela Mustafa Pasha Mosque in
the TRNC, and giving the existing building to the Archbishop as the St.
Nicholas Cathedral. The building is a very old, European-styled cathedral
that the Muslims stripped and converted to a mosque. The building is not
designed like a mosque to serve the religious needs of Muslims. This
proposal would shock the Archbishop and Greek Cypriots, and show that
Turks have a sense of sensibility to the Greeks and a sense of what
humanity demands. The Turkish Cypriots would receive support from
around the world, and tourism in the TRNC would benefit. The cost to the
Turkish Cypriots? Minor compared to pontificating the Turkish Cypriot
plea all over the world. Response or interest in this proposal? None.
3. Publicly ask the Archbishop to assume control over the Apostolos
Andreas Monastery. The Turkish Cypriots want to treat this very old
religious place in their territory as a museum. That shows that Turkish
Cypriots lack any sensibility toward Greek Cypriots. If Cyprus is to be one
country rather than two as at present, the human rights of the Greek
Cypriots must be recognized. By not doing such, the Turkish Cypriots are
hurting themselves. The Turkish Cypriots with their “defend Gallipoli at
all costs” mentality are unwilling to give an inch. They always want to
trade. They do not understand that sometimes you gain more by giving
without expecting a trade. This proposal, too, was ignored by the Turkish
Cypriot governments under Dr. Eroglu and President Mustafa Akinci.
The problem in negotiations with the trade approach is conditional offers
include the opportunity for the other party to reject the offer, or attempt to
change the offer, that is, play the circuitous Byzantine game. That approach
plays into the hands of the Greek Cypriots. Then there is no progress. If the
Turkish Cypriots just unconditionally give the St. Nicholas Cathedral and
Apostolos Andreas Monastery to the Greek Cypriots, the Greek Cypriot
religious leaders will gladly accept and have no basis to reject the gifts.
The political leaders will be taken out of their game. The cost is de
minimis, but the benefits would make the Turkish Cypriots winners. The
Greek Cypriots, and people of Greece, and the world would look
differently at Turks and Turkish Cypriots, and support the Turkish
Reformation. That could be the first real step to progress.
4. Publicly ask the Archbishop to supervise repairs to Christian sites in the
TRNC using unemployed Greek Cypriots with funding from the TRNC.
Turkey would probably be willing to fund the repairs. There is high
unemployment among the Greek Cypriots, and that is of great concern to
the Archbishop. With Greek Cypriots doing the work under the supervision
of church leaders, the Turkish Cypriots cannot be criticized for inferior
work. The Turks would only provide payroll and pay for materials. The
Archbishop and Greek Cypriots would be very appreciative, and tourism
for the entire island would increase.
The Christian sites were damaged or destroyed during the 1974 coup
attempt by the Greek Army and Greek Cypriot military forces. This scar of
the past should be removed. When I got to this proposal with the Turkish
Consul General to the United Nations his immediate reaction was whether
the Greek Cypriots would repair the mosques in the Greek Cypriot area of
the island. That shows the Gallipoli mentality and requirement to trade. The
Turks just do not know how to deal with Christians, and are suffering the
consequences. If the Turkish Cypriots (and Turks) are going to negotiate, they
need to know the opposition better than the opposition knows itself.
In addition to these proposals that were designed to secure the support of
one of the most important people, if not the most important, in Greek Cyprus,
the Archbishop, a list of other proposals were made. None have any
significant cost or are prohibitive in any way. Essentially the same proposal
was made to the Turkish Foreign Minister who became the Prime Minister.
No interest was shown by any Turk or Turkish Cypriot.
From my letter to Prime Minister Davutoglu of Turkey:
Prior to the Greek Army landing in Turkey in 1919, Greeks lived next door
to Turks. They ate in each other’s houses and were best friends. That all
changed with the invasion by the Greek Army. When people work together,
play together, and deal with each other frequently, the political barriers are
replaced by personal friendships. That is what must happen to change the
Greek Cypriots from 60% opposed to a federal state to 60% approving a
federal state. Programs need to be started that create this friendship. So
let’s have flea markets on the Turkish side of the border where Greek
Cypriots are invited to display and sell their products alongside the
Turkish Cypriots. Invite the Greek youth to participate in sporting events in
the TRNC where teams are mixed with both Turkish and Greek players.
Then spectators who are supporting a team will be supporting players
from the other end of the island. The more programs there are with Greek
Cypriot participation within the TRNC, the better.
There has been no response.
As a result, I do not expect any agreement will be crafted that the Greek
Cypriot people will support. The Greek Cypriot people still believe in
enosis. No one has explained the folly of that program to them.
The Greek Cypriots think they are in the driver’s seat in the negotiations.
They are, but only because they are negotiating with modern Turks and not
Ottoman Turks. Turkey, with its army stationed in Cyprus could force all the
Greek Cypriots to leave at any time just like Smyrna in 1922. However, that
is no longer the Turkish national character. Turk haters, take note. The Turks
and Turkish Cypriots are more likely to tire of the endless negotiating
gambits and simply make the northern half of Cyprus another province of the
Republic of Turkey. Both Turkish and Greek Cypriots would then be losers.
Another sign of the ignorance that exists at the highest levels of
government is the issue of natural gas located off the shores of Cyprus. The
Greek Cypriots claim the gas belongs to them and not the Turkish Cypriots.
The Turkish Cypriots say the gas should be shared. The Turkish Cypriots,
with the encouragement of Turkey, want the gas to go to Turkey and then to
the European market. So tiny Cyprus would be selling its precious natural
resource on the world market at the lowest price against countries like Iran
and Russia that have huge supplies of gas that have little value to them.
The Greek Cypriots want to build a facility to convert the gas to liquid.
Then they would export the gas. The project makes no economic sense given
the high cost of construction. Turkey wants a pipeline built that adds to the
cost of recovering gas from the bed of the Mediterranean sea. Cyprus should
avoid squandering its limited resources on either project.
The proposal I made was to:
1 Convert the power boilers that generate electricity in Cyprus from
imported diesel to natural gas. All Cypriots would benefit from the
reduction of imports and lower fuel costs. No politician has mentioned or
echoed this proposal.
2 Use the gas as a feedstock to produce higher value products, create
higher value jobs for both Greek and Turkish Cypriots, and insulate the
economy and people from the vacillations of the economy, including gas
prices. The economy could be diversified by producing from gas fertilizer,
paint, rubber, cosmetics, automobile fuel, glue, vinegar, insulation
materials, ammonia and many more products. One of the most important
are many polymers that are the basis for synthetic fabrics. These primary
products would then support export firms, and converters who make
something from these products. Synthetics can be dyed, cut and sewn. The
potential is almost limitless and would provide all citizens of the island
with so many possible opportunities. High unemployment would be a story
of the past. The light has not gone on in the heads of the Cypriot politicians
even after being handed the idea. I told both Presidents in my letters to
them “Creating those jobs would draw support from both populations and
eliminate gas as a problem during your negotiations.” And the reaction or
response? None.
The issue of greater significance in the negotiations between Greek and
Turkish Cypriot governments is the difference in standards of living. This
issue is not even being discussed, but should be of primary concern to the
Turkish Cypriots. In my letter to President Mustafa Akinci of the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus, I wrote:
One of the unspoken, but real, issues in your negotiations is the fact that
Greek Cypriots have a higher per capita income. The Greek Cypriots are
already faced with economic problems, and do not want to be faced with
supporting the poorer Turkish Cypriots. The Turkish Cypriots must achieve
parity. If the Turkish Cypriots can produce a higher level of income than
experienced by the Greek Cypriots, then the Greek Cypriots would want to
join in the Turkish Cypriot prosperity. This is a critical issue, because the
greatest obstacle to a settlement is how to protect the minority Turkish
Cypriots from the excesses of the majority Greek Cypriots. A Turkish
Cypriot population that controls the greater prosperity will hold those
excesses in check. Without this leverage, you will have to settle for a two-
state solution to protect the minority.
The prosperity the Turkish Cypriots must achieve comes from money. The
quickest way to accelerate the Turkish Cypriot economy would be the
establishment of one or more investment banks that offer confidential
investment accounts with superior financial returns. In other words, create
a banking opportunity like the Swiss offered before they started disclosing
depositor information to foreign governments. There will be a flight of
money to the TRNC. Those same investors might not trust the Greek
Cypriot banks after the recent haircut suffered by depositors. The TRNC
with its better banking reputation would create high income banking jobs,
and funding for construction and other bank loans in the TRNC and around
the world. The TRNC has invested heavily in education, and particularly
at the university level. Those graduates would be leaders of this economic
development. Other countries would object to the investment bank
proposal, but those other countries do not recognize the TRNC and have
done nothing to breach the isolation of the Turkish Cypriot people. Such
objections should be rejected.
“When an opportunity presents itself, you must seize upon that opportunity,
or it is the same as if the opportunity was never there.” Asa K. Jennings
wrote this to his son Asa W. Jennings on the occasion of AWJ’s 17th birthday.
The Greek Cypriot people are suffering with high unemployment and
lower wages, because Greek Cypriot banking officials lied when asked
where deposits were being invested. Contrary to instructions given to them,
these banking officials invested in Greek sovereign debt. Those values
evaporated with the implosion of the Greek economy. The solution was to
write off deposits, that is, tell those depositors that their deposits no longer
existed. Who in the world would now trust a Greek or Greek Cypriot
banker?
The Turkish Cypriot bankers have an opportunity that the Greek Cypriot
bankers have lost.
The isolation of a group of people from the world’s economy and
diplomacy, that is, the Turkish Cypriot people, is an issue. Even the United
States which values Turkey as one of its closest allies does not
diplomatically recognize the existence of the Turkish Cypriots as a sovereign
country. The U.S. and world recognize the Greek Cypriot half on the island
and trade with the Greek Cypriots. That trade contributes to the higher
standard of living the Greek Cypriots enjoy. So the U.S. and world are part
of the problem. The Turkish Cypriots owe the U.S. and world no apology or
help with world citizens interested to invest their money without the invasion
of their bank accounts by foreign governments. The sovereignty of citizens
must be protected from the excesses of governments.
The last President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, Dr. Dervis
Eroglu, is a trained medical doctor specializing in urology. The current
President Mustafa Akinci is a trained architect. The President of the Greek
Cypriots is Nicos Anastasiades, a lawyer. None were trained in how the
economic ecosystem works. So managing foreign trade to prevent the
financial drain of imports is unknown to them. Diversifying the economy, like
a company diversifies its business, to prevent wild swings in employment
and depressing effects on that economy that impact people is not considered.
The same is true in the U.S., and Cyprus serves as an example of what is
possible.
The U.S. has a huge trade deficit. Much of that is trade with China. So the
Chinese are enriched, and that funds their military. So the U.S. is forced to
adopt huge military budgets to protect the U.S. from the power created by the
trade imbalance. Every country should be thinking in these terms.
The U.S. problem could be solved easily and quickly by understanding that
foreign trade is an instrument of foreign policy. Low wage imports from
China should be shifted to other low wage countries like the neighbor of
Greece, Macedonia. The Kurds who have fought for generations for their
sovereignty under the brilliant leadership of Mustafa Barzani and now his
son Masoud Barzani critically need jobs. The U.S. and other enlightened
countries could create an economy of good jobs for the Kurds and Palestine
people in a nation carved out of the carcass of Syria nestled up against
friendly Jordan. Jordan is populated by more Palestinians than native
Jordanians, and King Abdullah’s wife is Palestinian. With good jobs, stable
economy and hope, the Palestinians would be a valuable neighbor to secure
the peace for Israel. Syria could be reduced to a peaceful nation, and Hamas
isolated and extinguished.
High wage jobs required to make products that are being imported should
be performed domestically. In the U.S. that means moving those businesses to
areas in the U.S. that need jobs like Detroit, West Virginia, and the Watts
section of Los Angeles. Higher value jobs placed in domestic locations give
the local population financial leverage in world markets and contribute to a
higher standard of living. The potential the U.S. has is the same for all
countries that manage their balance of trade and economy.
The politicians of both north and south Cyprus need to understand the
economic ecosystem in which their peoples live and work. Their actions do
not demonstrate this understanding. If they did, the Greek and Turkish Cypriot
citizens would be coming together for their common good as one country
respecting the human rights of all. This is what should be on the negotiating
agenda rather than parsing words.
There are a lot of people on the island of Cyprus and elsewhere in the
world that want the politicians on the island to be successful. When
suggestions are offered, but not acknowledged, people give up on the
politicians. The mood turns dark. The politicians should minimally be
involving in the decision making the people they represent. What is being
suggested? What is adopted? What is not adopted, and why? Credit those
who help, but thank all, and the politicians will receive more suggestions.
They will be shocked at the help that is available. A daily propaganda
statement and a few meetings with other politicians do not qualify for a
dialogue with the people who are affected by what politicians do and do not
do. The politicians have a lot to learn.
Albert Einstein said:
“When the solution is simple, God is answering.”
But, no one is listening in Cyprus, Turkey, the U.S. and elsewhere.