1. Dedicated to

almost completely destroyed. The new leading class was composed mostly
of bureaucrats and tax collectors. These bureaucrats and tax collectors had a
negative reputation for corruption and nepotism.
The Greek businessmen and diplomats located in the Phanar neighborhood
of Istanbul were different. They were respected for their capability. They
were known as Phanariots. The word Phanariots derives from the location in
Istanbul called the Phanar where the Ecumenical Patriarch of the Eastern
Orthodox Church resided and conducted the business of the Church. His All-
Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew is the current leader of the
Church of some three hundred million people today. He is located in the
same Phanar.
These Phanariots were prominent in the imperial capital of Istanbul. Using
their influence, the Greek Orthodox Church and the Ecumenical Patriarch
rose to great power under the Sultan’s protection, gaining religious control
over the entire Orthodox population of the Empire. Great value was placed
on education and diplomatic skill among the Phanariots. This had been true in
the earlier Byzantine era. By contrast, the Ottoman Turks were not raised
with this tradition. So the Sultan sought the help of the Phanariots by placing
them in key positions for their knowledge and skill.
Ottoman rule of the provinces was characterized by two main functions.
The local administrators within the provinces were to maintain a military
establishment and to collect taxes. The military establishment was feudal in
character. The Sultan’s cavalry was entirely Turkish. These members of the
military were allotted land. The size of the land was based on the rank of the
individual cavalryman. All non-Muslims were forbidden to ride a horse. The
Ottomans divided Greece into six sanjaks, each ruled by a Sanjakbey
accountable to the Sultan.
These Ottoman nobles lived well on the proceeds of their estates. The land
of the estate was tilled largely by peasants. The Ottomans basically installed
this feudal system right over the top of the existing system of peasant tenure.
The peasantry continued to own the land that supported the Ottoman nobles.
The ownership of the land was passed down as an inheritance in peasant
families. The peasants were not required to serve in the military. They were
not trusted by the Ottoman government to be loyal. All non-Muslims were
forbidden from carrying arms.