8. Arranging the Rescue

ARRANGING THE RESCUE
F
rom a report written by Asa K. Jennings on April 8, 1923, and mailed to
Mr. D.A. Davis of the International Y in Geneva:
At your request I shall attempt to give a brief description of some of my
activities in the Near East just before and following the occupation of
Smyrna.
Only three days after my arrival in Smyrna in August (that would be
August 19), Mr. Jacob left to enjoy his vacation with his family at Fokiss.
Mr. Fisher had finished his duties in connection with the Boys’ Summer
Camp and left with Mrs. Fisher to enjoy their vacation in Constantinople. I
was therefore in charge of the YMCA from that time until a few days
before the occupation of the city by the Turkish troops. When Mr. Jacob
returned, the city was then full of refugees who had been pouring into the
city in advance of the retreating Greek troops and advancing Turkish Army.
The sudden break of the Greek front (August 20) was altogether
unexpected and no one was prepared for the retreat of the Greeks. When
we saw what was coming, I with others, asked the American Consul, Mr.
Horton if it would not be wise to call the American colony together and
talk over what measures we would take for self protection in case of
emergency. He called a meeting but nothing definite was agreed upon
except to report the conditions fully to the U.S. High Commission at
Constantinople. Mr. Horton asked that we all seriously consider the
situation and meet again the next day. This we did. Meanwhile I was
impressed with the utter helplessness and hopeless condition of the
refugees and approached Mr. Horton on the question of forming some sort
of American Relief organization for benefit of the refugees. He told me to
talk with some other Americans and bring the question up at our next
meeting as it was his first duty to safeguard the Americans. Naturally I
talked with my American friends at the International College, as I knew
them best, and Prof. Lawrence agreed to make the proposition after I
raised the question in the meeting. This procedure was followed and a
temporary committee formed of which Mr. Lawrence was chairman. I
made the observation also that this committee would need money and
volunteered to act as secretary in recording the subscriptions which might
be made for this purpose at the meeting. The result was that the Standard
Oil Co headed the list with 500 Turkish lira and many others followed
with subscriptions 100 and 50 liras each.
When Mr. Jacob returned several of the committees had already been
appointed. Being the only American YMCA executive in Smyrna at the
time I naturally offered the full co-operation of the YMCA in any and
every possible way we might be of service. We were taken seriously and
elected to important and responsible positions on the committees. Thus the
YMCA was represented in the active organization of the first American
Relief Committee – most of the other organizations and many American
business men of Smyrna were also represented. It was decided to use the
YMCA building as headquarters. I was appointed chairman of the
committee of Investigation and Supplies shortly afterwards. This
committee was divided into committees: Investigation, and Supplies and
Bakeries. Upon Mr. Jacob’s return, Mr. Griswold was appointed chairman
of the Committee of Supplies and Bakeries and Mr. Jacob became the
chairman of the Committee of Investigation. Being relieved of this
responsibility I became general assistant to everybody. Drove
automobiles, guarded the YMCA building, ran errands, etc.
After the Greek Army began their retreat and some time before the
occupation of Smyrna by the Turks, a certain Greek family by the name of
Marsellou offered to turn over their house, #490 on the Quay, to me, to be
used as my own for any purpose I saw fit. After asking the advice of
Consul General Horton and others I finally decided to accept the owner’s
house, providing the owner turned it over without any responsibility
whatsoever, which he agreed to do. I will show later how this house
served a very important purpose. Before the arrival of the Turkish Army,
September 9th, we were all very busy securing supplies and feeding the
refugees. As I was first appointed chairman of Investigation and Supplies,
I personally secured from General Hajanhistis, head of the Greek Army, at
the last moment supplies which he had previously refused to give us, one
item of which was 410,000 ekes of flour. Most of the material turned over
to us was done at such a late date that it was not practical or wise for us to
move it. Mr. Jaquith of the Near East Relief and Major Davis of
Constantinople Chapter of the America Red Cross arrived from
Constantinople together with Captain Hepburn, representing Admiral
Bristol, U.S. High Commissioner, just before Turkish occupation and as
they came for the purpose of effecting a more or less permanent relief
committee to cooperate with a committee they had formed in
Constantinople we gladly permitted them to assume the leadership. During
and immediately following this period of time the numbers of refugees
increased and very soon the Turkish troops arrived. There was plenty of
business for everyone.
I used my so-called house at #490 Quay for an emergency Red Cross
Hospital and we gathered the women when we found who were giving and
about to give birth into this house where we gave them the best care
circumstances permitted. We also made this a refuge for girls, many of
whom were rescued by our sailors and by many other Americans from fate
worse than death. We also gathered about 400 orphans in front of the house
and gave them bread and water and watched them by night until they were
taken to Constantinople by an American destroyer. We gathered in here
also many children left alone without protection on the streets as the result
of the death of their parents, many of whom were massacred in the
presence of their children. Many students, both from the American
Collegiate Institute and the International College, came to us for refuge. It
became evident that one house could not hold all who expected our
protection, so we also assumed the supervision of several other houses
along the Quay between ’my house’ and the house taken over as an
American Consulate after the fire.
My home being in Paradise made it necessary for me to go and come until
my family embarked, September 13, the day of the fire, on the U.S.
Destroyer Simpson for Athens. My work also took me to different parts of
the city. I, therefore, had an unusual opportunity to see and experience
many things. Meanwhile our houses on the Quay were being over-
crowded.
No one can ever describe the sensations of those days. I have seen men,
women and children whipped, robbed, shot, stabbed and drowned in the
sea. And while I helped to save many, it seemed like nothing compared
with the great need. It seems as though the awful agonizing, hopeless
shrieks for help would forever haunt me.
After the burning of Smyrna, September 13, which occurred four days after
the occupation by the Turks and two days after Mustapha Kemal himself
had entered the city, every one knew that the only salvation of the
Christians of Smyrna, including the refugees who had been successful in
reaching Smyrna before the Turkish troops overtook them, was ships and
many of them. There were others who were trying to secure ships and to
whom we looked for results in this connection, and I confined my attention
to the care of the people we had encouraged to believe we would save and
were temporarily protecting in the houses along the Quay while we
relieved the distress and hunger of the masses as much as we were able.
We were momentarily afraid that the Turks would carry out their threat to
send everyone to the interior. We therefore became more and more anxious
and determined for boats. The numbers that the Committee was able to
send away for the week that followed the first were exceedingly few
compared with the great need, but it did seem as though no ships were
available.
People everywhere were praying for ships. I also prayed for ships. I am
sure I was no more anxious for ships than the others on the committee for
that reason I did nothing towards trying to secure ships as that task was not
assigned to me nor was I asked to assist.
However, on the 20th of September (my birthday) I was seized by an
almost uncontrollable desire to find some available means of saving at
least the persons I had been responsible for gathering into ‘my house’ and
other houses on the Quay.
Asa got in his Y Chevy and drove to the headquarters in a temporary
residence of Mustafa Kemal. No decision of any consequence was made by
anyone other than the great General himself. Approval and cooperation to
remove the refugees would require the personal order of Mustafa Kemal for
the operation to proceed unimpeded.
Mustafa Kemal had people of all kinds reporting to him constantly. There
was a steady stream of people coming to see the General, and to get orders.
Mustafa Kemal certainly must have heard of the distinctive looking little
American in the white hat who had been seen all over Smyrna driving his
Chevy. Not many people had the use of a car. The hunchback made Asa very
distinctive in appearance, plus he was a dapper dresser. He was constantly
foraging for flour and fuel, plus picking up orphans and women to take them
to a safe place. Why would this man with the American colors pinned on him
risk his life time and time again to save people he did not know? Why should
he care? The city was a very dangerous place where lots of people were
being robbed, beaten and killed. And he moved through the city oblivious to
the personal risk.
Mustafa Kemal had spent a lifetime engaged in military battles. He knew a
brave person when he saw one, but a hunchback American civilian? Mustafa
Kemal had never seen or heard of this before, and was interested to see this
curious little man. So when Jennings came calling, the great General agreed
to see him. Americans, unlike all the other Allies, had never claimed Turkish
territory and had always maintained friendly relations that benefited the
Turkish people even when technically being at war with Turkey during World
War One. The conduct of the Americans was about to pay a huge dividend for
the Greeks, Armenians and Jews.
The Asa K. Jennings who walked into the Turkish army headquarters was
a hunchback. His height had been shortened 5 inches to 5’2” by Potts disease,
a form of tuberculosis that was in his lungs, throat and bowels for two years
in 1905 and 1906. Over 20 doctors had said he would die within weeks, or
perhaps a few months, but he survived for his day in service to humanity.
Well dressed in a suit, he was a diminutive little man standing before the
mighty and all-powerful Gazi Mustapha Kemal Pasha. The contrast between
the two men was stark. The Gazi controlled an army and government, and
was the symbol of strength. Little Asa did not control or have a title from any
government or organization, and had no authority or support for the proposal
he was about to make. The fact that the Gazi would even listen to this
“nobody” is startling. The fact that the Gazi agreed with the proposal, and
gave Asa a chance to perform required a huge leap of faith by the Gazi. He
was a Turk like no other, and the Turkish people today do not know of that
moment when the Gazi made the decision to turn the Turkish nation from an
imperialistic power to a nation dedicated to peace and prosperity. September
20, 1922, is a date all Turks should know as their beginning as a peaceful
nation.
The Turkish leader had a huge problem. The port was full of people who
were undesirable to the Turks. The weather was very hot. Death and
destruction were everywhere. There was no sanitation. The odor from the
rotting dead was horrific. Disease could break out at any time. The Turks
could not let this condition to continue. The Nationalist government had
announced its intention to march all these people to the interior of Turkey,
because Turkey did not have ships to deport these people. There would be no
food, water, medical or other help on the march to the interior, and all these
people would certainly die. The Gazi did not want that on his hands. He had
no options. Then came Jennings with an option.
The request was simple. Jennings wanted the opportunity to remove the
minorities from Smyrna in order to bring the fighting, killing, looting and
other violence to an end. It was time to bring peace to Turkey. It was time to
make Turkey a different place where the Turkish people would live in peace
and prosperity devoid of the violence that had been the scourge of Turkey for
so long. Kemal wanted peace for his people, and the proposal to remove the
source of violence was appealing. It would be Peace at Home and Peace in
the World. He agreed.
However, Kemal laid down some conditions.
1. No Greek flags could be displayed. Greek flags would incite violence
after all the Turks had suffered. That condition made sense.
2. No men of military age (ages 18-45) could leave Turkey, because
Kemal did not want them returning as another invading army. That was a
tragic condition, because most of those men were never seen again.
Jennings accepted this condition, because he had no choice. He was not in
a position to dictate anything to the all-powerful Turkish General. Asa’s
approach was to take what he could, and then work as best he could
around the problems.
3. No ships could tie up at the wharf. The refugees would have to be
ferried in little boats anchored in the harbor. Kemal wanted to control the
emigration so the men of military age did not leave Turkey. That condition
was relaxed, to the credit of the Turks, to allow ships to tie up at the
railroad pier to speed loading of ships. The Turks could control emigration
at the railroad pier.
4. Asa was granted only 7 days to remove the refugees, some 350,000
people, from Smyrna. The best estimate available was 300,000 Greeks
and 25,000 Armenians and 25,000 Jews. In an environment of “Turkey for
the Turks” with all the violence, anyone who was not a Muslim Turk
wanted to leave for their personal safety. That was a lot of people in a
very short number of days when Asa did not have any ships. The 7 days
was the result of the pressure on the Gazi to move these people out of the
city. As Asa left the Turkish headquarters, he must have wondered how he
could meet such an expectation. The task was daunting, but Asa K.
Jennings was, by all reports from those who knew him best, fearless,
determined and optimistic.
In 1938 Asa W. Jennings, son of AKJ, wrote to Columbia Broadcasting
System commenting on a radio program, saying:
I am quite well acquainted with what actually happened at the time, as it so
happened I was with him (AKJ) during nearly all of the period which was
the subject of your program. He also wrote: my Father was anything but a
“timid soul.” When he went into the Harbor of Smyrna with the Greek
ships it was not without knowledge on his part that the embarkation of the
refugees could be safely conducted. Prior to the time he issued his
ultimatum to the Greek Government, he (AKJ) had talked with the Turkish
High Command in Smyrna and received from them, on direct orders from
Kemal Ataturk, who died last week, assurance that the Greek ships would
be unmolested and would be permitted to take out the refugees. The reason
for the insistence of the Greek Government that my Father be on the first
Greek ship that entered the Harbor was that they doubted whether or not
the Turks would keep the promise they had previously given to my Father.
Moreover, it was not merely by chance that an American destroyer was
close by at the time he entered the Harbor of Smyrna with the first Greek
ships. That was all pre-arranged and the American destroyer was acting on
orders of Admiral Bristol. It was the same destroyer that had taken my
Father to the Island of Mitylene, from whence my Father had contacted the
Greek Government, they having made use of the radio of the Greek
battleship Kilkis.
Time was short. The grace period extended to Asa K. Jennings was 7
days. As the rescue proceeded, the rescue was well under way at the end of 7
days, but the task had not been completed. To the credit of the Turks, they
extended the deadline to 11 days so that every refugee could be removed
from Smyrna, Turkey.
During those 11 days Asa was getting requests to send ships to other ports
where people were also desperate to be saved. The Turkish government said
that the Smyrna operation must be completed first. Once all the refugees were
gone from Smyrna, then Asa was approved to proceed to other ports. Initially
Greek ships were not allowed in the Black Sea, and foreign flag ships had to
be contracted for that relief work. Later the Turks relaxed that condition so
that Greek ships could go into the Black Sea.
Getting the agreement with Mustafa Kemal was only part of the challenge.
Jennings needed ships, lots of ships. The Turks had no ships. The Greeks
were a maritime nation with lots of ships. Asa drove to the port of Smyrna
(Izmir). He later wrote to D.A. Davis of the Y in Geneva:
At this time there were three Destroyers in the Smyrna port, the Edsall,
Litchfield, and Lawrence, and I must say that the Navy crowd was
exceedingly kind in every way. In my attempts to save people from
drowning and many other of my activities, my friends of the Navy simply
let me go. I was not even restricted in giving orders. It must be
remembered, however, that we were in an extreme emergency when
anything that anyone could do to help the situation was welcomed.
I saw a large ship some distance from the Quay taking on passengers. I
asked Captain Powell of the U.S.S. Edsall for a motor boat to see whether
we could get passage for any of our special cases. He readily gave me a
boat and told me to go to the Pierre Loti and do my darndest. I found that
the ship was a French boat and had already promised passage to more
people than they could take.
The truth is the French captain did not want to get involved, and chose to
sail off with available space on the deck or someplace on the ship. AKJ was
being kind to the French by his comments.
However, some distance from the French boat, I saw a large cargo boat,
flying an Italian flag. I ordered the motor boat to take me to that ship and
discovered that the captain had not a single refugee on board and expected
to sail that afternoon direct for Constantinople. He had a few passengers,
as his ship was provided with a very few cabins. I put up the possibility of
his taking 2000 refugees and landing them at Mitylene. Many difficulties at
once presented themselves.
When the British troops were on the beach at Dunkirk, and vessels of all
kinds crossed the English Channel to bring the troops home to safety, no
captain of any vessel presented problems of any kind. This was an
emergency, and as Asa just said, people do what they can to help the
situation. So the Italian captain wants something. I add this comment so
readers understand what the Italian was thinking.
How could he get his orders changed; if so, what assurance could we give
him that the Greeks at Mitylene would let the refugees land; would the
Turkish authorities allow us to take 2000 refugees off the Quay and bring
them to his boat, and what means had we for transporting so many, etc.,
and last but not least, financially, would it be worth while to try and
overcome all these difficulties.
In short, the captain was bargaining for a bribe – known as baksheesh in
the Middle East. Such corruption is common in the Middle East.
To make the story short, we overcame all of those difficulties to the
satisfaction of the captain before the hour he was scheduled to sail, but it
was understood that we must do our best to have refugees aboard by 10:00
o’clock the next morning. However, as it was the first time we had sent so
many at one time and because of a rough sea, it took us until late afternoon
before the boat was ready to lift anchor.
Then there was another problem. The captain wanted more money. In other
words, he wanted to raise the bribe price. Asa asked “how can you ask for
more money? You have already agreed to the price.” The captain responded
that the Greeks might not let the people disembark at Mitylene, and he would
have to take the refugees to a port further away. That requires additional
money. To remove the threat of the Greeks in Mitylene denying the refugees a
place to stay, Asa said he would go on the trip, and the negotiations with the
Greeks would be his responsibility. When the ship arrived in Mitylene there
was no problem getting the people off the ship.
When I boarded the refugee ship to accompany them to Mitylene I
experienced the most humiliating sensation of my life. The boat was so
crowded I could hardly pass from the gangway to the cabin, for all along
the way the refugees pressed around me to tell me of some of their family
who were not included, to ask where more boats would come, and to ask
where they were going. They kissed my hands and my clothing and many
actually grabbed me and fell to my feet and kissed my shoes. This was too
much for me. Upon reaching my cabin I shut the door and spent some time
with my own thoughts and God.
From the interview by R.W. Abernethy for his article “The Great Rescue”
published in The Spirit of the Game by Basil Mathews, George H. Doran
Company, New York, 1926, Asa said:
I have depended on the Lord all my life, but never did I throw myself so
completely upon Him as during those days. I knew that I had begun on the
most difficult job I ever attempted, and knew how powerless I was to see
it through unless I felt that the Lord was with me all along. There in that
cabin I thanked Him for His guidance, and asked Him to continue it. He
did, as I think you will agree.
I went up on deck shortly and organized two committees, one of Armenians
and one of Greeks, to take charge of the landing of their respective groups
when we reached Mitylene. It was a slow crossing, and although the island
is only sixty miles from Smyrna, it took us nearly eight hours to get there,
and we did not reach the harbor until midnight. It was impossible to land
people then, so we delayed until seven o’clock the next morning, the 22nd.
In the interim I went ashore and organized a local committee to supervise
the landing of all refugees to be landed there.
From Smyrna I had wired to C. Calvin Davis, head of the Constantinople
Chapter of the Red Cross telling him that I had been able to secure a ship
to take 2,0000 refugees to Mitylene, and asked him to send me two wires,
one ordering me to land refugees there under the aegis of the Red Cross,
and to investigate food conditions; the other giving me official
authorization to act as I saw fit in any subsequent emergency. These wires
had been quickly forthcoming, and when at Mitylene I showed them to the
Governor General of the island he not only agreed to let us land the 2,000
refugees, but said he would take care of as many more as they could
furnish food for. This did not mean so much at the time for food conditions
were bad by reason of the fact that there were then on the island 35,000
Greek troops which had been stationed at Smyrna in addition to all the
refugees that had fled from the city before the Turkish occupation. But I
accepted his offer with thanks, and told him that I knew I could get food
from the Near East warehouses in Constantinople. This was done.
Further in the AKJ letter to D.A.Davis of the YMCA in Geneva:
Major Davis from Constantinople, chairman of the Smyrna Disaster
Committee, gave me the necessary papers and authorization to proceed to
Mitylene with 2000 refugees; and after disembarking same to inspect the
island with reference to food, clothing, housing, etc., with a view to
transporting more refugees there and report same to him in Smyrna.
Captain Powell sent a radio message to the Litchfield, which ship had left
for Constantinople, to stop at Mitylene and pick me up upon his return the
next day. We left Smyrna on the Italian ship ‘Constantinople,’ September
21st, and arrived at Mitylene about midnight. En route I met a Smyrna
business man, Mr. Ernest Aliotte, an Italian subject who was on his way to
Constantinople. Inasmuch as he spoke English and Greek, and had a clear
understanding of the circumstances, I persuaded him to stop off at Mitylene
with me, as I knew absolutely no one there, and help me manage the
situation. This he consented to do. During the night we organized
committees on the boat in order to more efficiently disembark the refugees
and provide for them temporarily afterwards. At 5:00 a.m. we went
ashore, found the harbor master, Captain Garkas, got him out of bed,
accepted his and Aliotte’s recommendation of other men who might serve
on an emergency relief committee, called on them and by 7:00 o’clock the
doctor had visited the ship. We had secured permission to land the
refugees at Mityene and had actually begun work.
In his report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine AKJ commented:
What interested me most was that in the harbor at Mitylene there were
twenty empty Greek ships. The cries that went up from the refugees on
board this Italian boat when we arrived there and saw these twenty ships
cannot be described. Knowing that their relatives and friends and
compatriots were still in Smyrna, and contrasting that situation with their
own escape, they thronged the government headquarters and urged that
these ships be released. And they found that I was calling upon the military
governor for the same purpose.
When the ship arrived at Mitylene Asa was surprised to see many Greek
soldiers and ships at anchor. When he inquired he found the soldiers had
come from Smyrna, and the ships were under the control of General Frangos.
Continuing with this report to D.A. Davis of the YMCA:
At this time there were over 35,000 Greek soldiers on the island, as this
was before the revolution. (The revolution was the coup of the King
several days later.) Several refugees were already there, many having
come before the arrival of Kemal’s army in Smyrna. We found the island in
great need of flour, as at that time no more than three days supply was in
sight. We were most fortunate in securing as members of our committee a
former British officer, Percifal Hodkinson, a prominent business man from
Smyrna who, with his family had been spending his vacation in Mitylene,
and Captain Panos Argyropoulos, a former naval officer under previous
Venizelos government and who knew shipping from A to Z.
We met the governor-general of the island, Gr. Spilisopoulos, the
Commander-in-Chief of the South Army, General Frangos; the Mayor of
the city, Mr. Pospaskinay, and reviewed the situation with reference to the
immediate needs of the island and the prospect of bringing more refugees
to Mitylene. It was agreed to use the island of Mitylene as temporary
refugee station, providing arrangements could be made to bring them as it
is nearest to Smyrna. Housing problem was not a serious one as the
weather was very fine and any place would be better than on the Quay at
Smyrna. With reference to the food question, I assured them that the
American Relief Committee would provide an emergency flour relief if
necessary. I raised the question of necessity for so many soldiers on the
island and they assured me that it was because of the rapid evacuation of
Smyrna and that the government would take immediate steps to transport
its troops elsewhere. We then took up the serious question of
transportation.
As a result of the rapid advance of the Turkish troops and quick get-away
of Greek troops from Smyrna, most of the ships which had been in Smyrna
Bay had been taken to Mitylene and were still there. When the refugees
saw all these ships in Mitylene harbor they came to us crying and pleading
that these ships be sent to Smyrna at once.
General Frangos admitted the boats in the harbor were under his control
and direction as all had been commandeered by the Greek Government. He
intended to use some of these in sending away part of the Greek Army but
for some reason they were not leaving. We found out afterward that it was
because of the plans of the revolutionary party and only two days from that
time every soldier went over to the so-called Venizelos Government, as it
was at Mitylene that the plans for the revolution were executed and first
became effective.
General Frangos was part of a group of military officers planning a coup
of King Constantine. Gaining power was the primary objective rather than
saving some 300,000 Greeks, plus others, at imminent risk of death at the
hands of the Turks. This is the corruption of Greece. The leaders claim to be
Christians, but do not follow the teachings of Jesus Christ. And where were
the leaders of the Greek Orthodox Church?
I asked why, if General Frangos had power to give us boats he could not
let us have those under his authority to bring refugees from Smyrna. He
said it would give him great pleasure to do so but that they feared the boats
would never return. I asked him if he would give the boats if we could
assure him the boats would not be molested by the Turks. He replied in the
affirmative. I asked him how many he could let us have under those
conditions, and he replied six of the smaller type boats in the harbor. I
asked for the larger ones also, but he insisted they were for the troops.
I did not carry the question any further.
Of course they were for the troops, that is, the troops to over throw the
King. The response by the General was the characteristic duplicity of
Byzantine negotiators who the Greeks have learned to imitate. The response
did not address the immediate need to save the lives of Greek citizens.
Asa Jennings left that meeting fuming. He knew that the General controlled
the ships, and therefore the lives of Greek citizens, but for unknown reasons
would not come to the aid of the Greek citizens. Asa knew that the General
did not act as one would expect in these circumstances. There had to be an
unknown reason. It was only later after the coup that Asa understood why the
General was being devious, dishonest and resistive.
Captain Rhodes of the Litchfield arrived at Mitylene in the later afternoon,
September 22, from Constantinople, to take me back to Smyrna. I had not
finished all tentative preparations, so he very kindly waited for me. En
route Smyrna, my report was sent by radio to Captain Powell of the
Edsall, Senior Officer Present. Davis had returned to Constantinople
during the day. By the time we reached Smyrna, Captain Powell had
reached an agreement with the Turkish authorities with reference to bring
in Greek ships, and before we dropped anchor boarded the Litchfield with
permission to bring in ships not flying Greek flag for purpose of
transporting refugees.
All major decisions by the Nationalist Government of Turkey were by
Mustafa Kemal himself. He had previously approved the removal of the
refugees, and the order was confirmed through his ranks.
After a brief conference, Captain Powell ordered the Litchfield to take me
back to Mitylene full speed and instructed me to bring in the ships and he
would make preparations to have them loaded with refugees.
It was necessary for me to have an order in my hand for the ships which I
could show to the authorities at Mitylene.
Can you imagine such a requirement during a crisis with so many lives at
risk? This was another devious stall by the powers hoping to derail Jennings
so the coup could go forward unimpeded. However, Jennings had no choice
but to work through the objections.
Captain Rhodes and I quickly reached an agreement and he signed the
following order:
U.S.S. LITCHFIELD (336)
Smyrna, Asia Minor
September 22, 1922
A.K. Jennings
American Relief Committee
Mitylene, Greece
Sir:
In accordance with orders received at Smyrna from Captain H. Powell,
Senior Naval Officer, U.S. Navy (U.S.S. EDSALL), the ships at Mitylene are
ordered to proceed to Smyrna for the purpose of transporting refugees to
Mitylene. Ships will not be molested in any way, providing they do not fly
Greek flag or tie up at the quay or pier. If desirable, ships can be escorted in
and out harbor. If possible send U.S.S. Edsall radio call when ships leave
Mitylene for Smyrna. Flour is on the way to Mitylene.
J. B. Rhodes
Lieutenant-Commander, U.S. Navy
Commanding U.S.S. LITCHFIELD
The Litchfield wired the Sulferino, an Italian Destroyer in the port of
Mitylene, to send a small boat to take me ashore immediately on arrival,
which they did so that the Litchfield could proceed at once to
Constantinople. Immediately after landing, which was about 1:30 a.m., I
called members of our emergency committee, Captain Panos
Argyropoulos, Captain Percival Hodkinson, Errnest Aliotte, and the
harbor master, Captain Garkas, and together we called upon the military
governor, General Bakas, and the Commander-in-Chief of the South Army,
General Frangos, who had conditionally promised us the six small ships.
In spite of our order and assurance we found him unwilling to trust the
ships to us until he could communicate with the government at Athens and
he could not give us even a good guess as to when we might expect a
favorable reply. Needless to say, we put all the pressure on him we could
and he promised to do his best.
These are Byzantine negotiating tactics. Delay, mis-direct, and change
prior commitments. Lives hang in the balance. The clock is ticking down to
the limit allowed by General Mustafa Kemal. The conduct of General
Frangos was dishonorable to his compatriots.
After leaving him we decided to visit the Greek battleship Kilkis (old
U.S.S. Mississippi) which fortunately was at that time in Mitylene harbor,
and put the proposition to the Commander, Captain Theofanides, in order
that we might secure his cooperation and if possible use his radio in order
to get in direct and immediate touch with the Greek government. We found
him most receptive and anxious to do all within his power, offering to
communicate in code, any messages we might wish to send to the
government. We gladly availed ourselves of this opportunity, as every
moment was precious, the Turkish authorities having given only the last
day of September to evacuate all the refugees except men between 18 and
45 from Smyrna – not permitting the refugees to leave any other Asia
Minor port until Smyrna was evacuated. We addressed our
communications to the Prime Minister direct.
The first message written by Asa K. Jennings appears below in his
handwriting on a radio message form of the Kilkis.
Asa K. Jennings handwritten radio message
to the Prime Minister of Greece
This message written in English was then translated into Greek by Captain
I. Theofanides. This also is an exact copy.
Radio Message Written in Greek by Captain I. Theofanides
Following is an English translation of the message written by Captain
Theofanides. When read carefully, this shows the Captain was attempting to
make the message of Asa K. Jennings more forceful. Captain I. Theofanides
was now a principal partner in the rescue of thousands of Greeks and other
Christians and Jews.
Radio Message of Captain Theofanides Written in English
The message as written by Captain Theofanides was then taken to the
radio room on the Kilkis. The message was put into code, and then
transmitted by radio to Athens. Continuing with the report from Asa K.
Jennings to his superior D.A. Davis of the International YMCA in Geneva:
We were told to wait as it was too early in the morning to do business. We
replied that we demanded a meeting of the cabinet at once or we would
wire our request and reasons for doing so quite open, not using code.
As Admiral “Dannys” Theofanides, Grandson of Captain I. Theofanides,
told me in Athens in 2013 such a threat issued to the Government would
never have been allowed by the captain of a Greek ship, unless Captain I.
Theofanides agreed with the threat. Again, the Captain showed he was a
partner, and by allowing such an aggressive act, he was putting his own
career in the Greek Navy at risk. The Captain obviously cared more about
the Greek people at risk.
Photo of Captain I. Theofanides
From “The Great Rescue” interview as recorded by R.W. Abernethy:
This was about four o’clock in the morning, so I didn’t expect a reply for a
little time, but soon one came demanding to know who I was. Now that
was a very natural query. I had been in that part of the world only about a
month, and no one had ever heard of me. So I cabled back that I was in
charge of the American Relief at Mitylene. And I was. I didn’t explain
however, that I held the position solely by virtue of the fact that I was the
only American there!
From the Mrs. Emmons Blaine report:
We were promised a meeting of the cabinet at earliest possible moment
when our request would be given serious consideration. We demanded all
the ships in the Mitylene harbor and also all available ships at Piraeus.
Many were the messages exchanged between us and the government. It
must be borne in mind that it was still the Royalist or Constitutionalist
Government, as the revolution did not take place until some days later.
They insisted we guarantee their protection for their ships.
The Government was afraid the Turks would capture the Greek ships and
invade the Greek islands.
We would not agree to go any further than the orders and instructions we
had received, but assured them that an American Destroyer would escort
their ships into and out of the Smyrna harbor and that American officers
and sailors would assist in loading the refugees. They asked if an
American would also travel with the ships and I promised them that I
would travel with the first ship and remain aboard during the loading of
refugees and direct the loading of the others.
The Greek Government thought the Turks would sink the first Greek ship to
enter the port of Smyrna, and that would be the end of this pesky Jennings.
The Greek government was driving at the question of whether the U.S. Navy
would defend the Greek ships with American guns in the event the Turks
attempted to take control of the Greek ships. The question was “Does it mean
that American destroyers will protect the ships if the Turks attempt to take
them?” Asa had never discussed all the possibilities with Commander
Powell.
My patience was beginning to run dry, too, so I wired the Greek
Government that there wasn’t time to go into details of how we were going
to protect Greek ships. I said that the Commander of the American
destroyer squadron at Smyrna had given his guarantee that protection
would be offered all Greek ships, and I asked them if anything could be
more satisfactory!
In his report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine, AKJ provides further insight:
I found afterwards the reason they asked that I enter the port of Smyrna
with the first Greek ship going in for the refugees was that if anything
happened they could show that the Americans had led them into a trap. But
fortunately nothing happened, and the Turks kept their word.
Continuing with the letter to D.A. Davis:
All these wireless communications took time. The Captain of the Kilkis
insisted for me that the government give us an immediate answer or tell us
when we might expect one.
The Captain established himself in history as the hero of the Greek people.
Finally we agreed to serve them an ultimatum, allowing them until 6:00
P.M. to give us a favorable reply. We further told them if they did not
acknowledge receipt of our ultimatum we would wire them quite open so
that anyone could pick up the message, for we had thus far been using the
code for all messages.
Captain I. Theofanides had to approve that message being sent.
Blackmail by a Methodist minister!
We immediately received word that the ultimatum had been received and
that we might expect an answer. In this ultimatum we showed them the
sympathy of the world would be with the Turks and that no amount of
explaining would ever justify the Greek Government for not permitting the
Americans to assist them evacuate their own nationals when the lives of
thousands depended upon the Greek Government furnishing the ships and
accepting any possible risk of their being captured by the Turks, since
highest Turkish authorities in Smyrna had granted permission to Americans
to bring the Greek ships into Smyrna Bay, provided they did not fly the
Greek flag or tie up at the quay or pier.
There was only one “highest Turkish authority” and that was Mustafa
Kemal himself. He would never have delegated such an important decision,
and no person on his staff would consider making such an important decision.
Kemal was revered by all Turks as the sole authority, a benevolent dictator,
if you like.
We assured them if they would not give their ships that the American
Relief Committee after using the few ships already chartered would wash
their hands of the whole affair and put the responsibility upon the Greek
nation and tell the reason to the world.
Blackmail again!
Asa K. Jennings then sent the following radio message to Captain Powell
of the U.S. Navy in Smyrna. NUPM is the call sign of the destroyer that
Captain Power commanded.
Radio Message Jennings to Captain Powell 12 Ships
Before expiration of time limit given in our ultimatum we received word
that all Greek and government owned ships in Piraeus harbor had been
ordered to Mitylene to be placed under our command. At the same time,
General Frangos who was responsible for Greek ships in Mitylene harbor,
was ordered to turn same over to us at once.
Asa Jennings then sent the following radio message to the Greek
Government in Athens:
Mr. Jennings on behalf of American Relief Committee gratefully
appreciates the Hellenic Government’s prompt cooperation in connection
with the transport of the Smyrna refugees.
Radio Message from Rear Admiral Kalamidus
Then Asa Jennings received the following radio message from General
Frangos. The message is written by the hand of Asa Jennings on a radio
message form of the Kilkis. A typed copy is provided to make reading easier.
Frangos Acknowledges All Ships
Captain Theofanides of the Kilkis immediately called all of the captains of
ships in harbor to his battleship. They were given orders that they and their
ships were all under my command and were asked how many could be
ready to proceed to Smyrna by 12:00 midnight. There were many excuses;
finally 10 ships agreed to be ready.
Admiral “Dannys” Theofanides in Athens in 2013 reported that the ship
captains were afraid to enter a Turkish port, and thus the reason for the
excuses. The Admiral then said that his Grandfather told the captains that any
ship not ready to sail by midnight would see its captain face a court martial
(confirmed in notes left by AKJ) followed by a firing squad on the fantail of
the Kilkis. Suddenly, the captains said their ships would be able to make the
voyage. Captain I. Theofanides is the hero of the Greek people, but
unfortunately, the Greek people do not know of his heroism.
AKJ was on the lead ship, the Ismini. He had the Greek flag lowered, and
the American flag raised as this ship was now under the command of an
American. With a line of more ships following behind, the refugees referred
to AKJ as Admiral, although he never received any such appointment from
the Greeks or U.S. Continuing with the Asa K. Jennings report to D.A. Davis
of the YMCA in Geneva:
On the morning of September 23rd, the American Destroyer Lawrence,
under the command of Captain Wolleson, met us some distance outside of
Smyrna Bay and escorted us to anchorage. The sight of so many boats
coming into harbor at one time produced a great sensation among the
refugees. Captain Powell, Senior Naval Officer Present, Smyrna, soon
arranged for a certain number of boats to dock at the end of the Aidin
railroad pier, under supervision of Turkish authorities but assisted by
American officers and sailors. I directed the ships.
Several barriers or gates guarded by the Turkish officers and soldiers
were arranged by the Turkish authorities, beginning on the quay and
continuing until almost the end of the long railroad pier. On the quay and
along this pier, the victims of the Smyrna tragedy were made to pass
before they could embark on ships we had brought in for that purpose and
there they were examined, searched and robbed; many were most cruelly
treated and all men between the ages of 18 and 45 (many 15 and 60)
arrested and taken to prison unless they could prove they were foreign
subjects. As many of the naturalized foreign subjects had their papers
forcibly taken from them, including Americans, they could not prove their
rightful contention and were led away with the others. Some of these,
especially Americans, because of their faithful work of the American Vice
Consul Maynard Barnes (remember, the Consul George Horton had run for
his life on September 13), and members of the American Relief
Committee, were afterward released.
Captain Panos Appointed
USN Carrying a Refugee on Stretcher
Men to be Taken to Interior on Railroad Pier
From the report to Mrs. Emmons Blaine:
Every day more ships came. All available sailors were released for
service. Every American, and others as well, devoted their utmost effort
and worked night and day until during the last week before the 30th of
September, the date set by the Turks when the refugees must either return to
the interior or have left for other parts, the evacuation was completed.
Further from the AKJ report to D.A. Davis of the YMCA:
The second day our boats from Piraeus arrived and the next day we led in
17 ships. From this time until the expiration of the time limit we had
between 40 and 50 ships under our command operating between Smyrna
and Mitylene and other ports on the island and mainland of Greece. Some
boats, like the Magalia Hallas, we did not send into the Smyrna harbor, but
transferred refugees to these larger boats after leaving Smyrna and sent
them to such ports as Salonika, Piraeus, Patras, etc.
After bringing more than 200,000 refugees through Mitylene and 80,000
through Chios, we found it necessary to send many direct to other islands
and to the mainland of Greece from Smyrna. We were able to do this and
to re-distribute the surplus at Mitylene and Chios and other islands after
the government furnished us a list of various ports together with the
possible number they could care for.
We were greatly handicapped on account of the revolution which began
first to function at Mitylene and occurred only two days after we had
received the order from the Royalist Government giving us the ships.
Wouldn’t you think the coup could have been delayed until after the rescue
mission? The revolution at this critical time shows the priorities of the
leaders to be personal rather than humanitarian. That has been a constant
problem in Greece since its liberation from the Ottoman Turks.
As soon as the revolutionary government came into power at Mitylene, we
at once visited the new authorities and asked for a ratification of the
previous government’s action, in assigning us ships, etc. This they did
without hesitation.
At this point, the rescue operation was wildly popular. Jennings was well
known among the Greek people. There is no way the new Government could
have stopped the continuing rescue operation without a violent reaction
against the new Government.
Asa K. Jennings in Mitylene
For a short period (about five days) we were operating under two
governments, the revolutionary government at Mitylene and the Royalist
government at Athens. If the Americans had not secured the ships when
they did and insisted on having a free hand to operate same, shipping
would have been paralyzed during this critical period. As it was however,
we were able to complete the evacuation of Smyrna within six hours of the
expiration of the time limit.
The original time limit of 7 days had been extended by the Turks to 11
days to get all the refugees out of Smyrna.
The American Relief Committee at Smyrna had asked the privilege of
taking refugees from other points on the Asia Minor coast; also, before the
expiration of time limit; but were told by Turkish authorities that positively
no other points could be evacuated until Smyrna had been completed. The
Committee, not sure that Smyrna could be cleared by date set, which was
midnight, September 30th, asked for an extension of time limit. Finally, on
the afternoon of the last day, an extension of eight days was granted, which
time allowed for the evacuation of the smaller towns along the Asia Minor
coast of the Archipelago.
In many of these towns, notably Aivili, Dekili, Pergamos, and inland
towns, surrounding the Gulf of Adrinide, sincere agreements were made
between the Turkish and Greek inhabitants that they would continue to live
together after the Turkish occupation, in harmony, each respecting the
rights of the other as before. The Turkish population, through their leaders,
made public pledges to this effect, and the Christian population through
their leaders, publicly accepted, swearing by the Koran and the Bible
respectively.
This accounts for the small exodus of Christian population before the
arrival of Turkish troops, although they had plenty of time to get away after
the capture of Smyrna. A good example is Aivali, where our Destroyer
McLeish, under command of Captain Ellis, arrived with the American
Consul, Oscar Heiser on board. They were told by the Turkish
commandant then in charge and also by the Greek metropolitan,
supposedly representing the Christian population, that the Christians did
not care to leave.
The Americans under escort of Turkish authorities, made a brief survey of
the town and found everything in full swing, with all the business places in
operation, except the wine shops, which the Turkish authorities declared
they had closed, and this was the report that Captain Ellis sent to the
Senior Naval Officer Present at Smyrna. I was not satisfied with this
report, as I had been talking with men who had come from there and knew
that many desired to leave and that probably the Greek metropolitan did
not speak his real mind.
Subsequent events disclosed the fact that many Christians did wish to
leave, and later as many as could get to the ships, numbering about 15 to
18,000 did leave, when boats were escorted to Aivali for that purpose,
under supervision of Captain Ellis. So the refugees had been tricked by the
Turks with the help of the Greek metropolitan. That gave the Turks the
opportunity to weed out the men of military age so they would not return in
the future as another invading army.
Men of military age were arrested and sent to jail. Many families,
however, after being separated from fathers, husbands, brothers, were sent
into the interior, without any opportunity to leave whatsoever. Some of the
same refugees who have been deported in the interior from Smyrna and
nearby towns have appeared in Samsun and also Mersin for embarkation.
Most of their numbers, however, perished.
Samsun is about 525 miles away, and Mersin is about 473 miles away
(761 km).
All the above quotations are from the report dated April 8, 1923, of Asa
K. Jennings submitted to D. A. Davis of the YMCA in Geneva.
After the rescue was completed, AKJ was asked by R.W. Abernethy what
one incident that moved him most deeply. He replied:
I was out here one afternoon on a destroyer, just about where the ship is
riding now, when I heard a cry from the water below, and looking over the
rail saw a little fellow swimming by the side of the ship. How he had
eluded the bullets of Turkish rifles I do not know; but there he was, and
nearly exhausted from his swim. He caught sight of me and begged
piteously for help. I called to some of the boys on the ship to help me let
down a rope and draw him up. We finally got the little chap on deck, and
discovered that he was an Armenian. He could speak only a little English,
but he didn’t have to use that to tell us that he was cold. He had no clothes,
and had evidently been in the water some time. One of the sailors got an
old pair of trousers and wrapped the boy up in them. I say ‘wrapped’ for
they were large enough to be coat and trousers both for him. I knew that we
had better put him in some more or less obscure place for the time being,
so motioned to him to crawl back behind one of the boats. He did so, and
was so exhausted that, warmed by the wrap we had given him, he
immediately went to sleep.
It was not long after that I heard a commotion on the other side of the deck,
and hurried over to see some of the boys pointing to a young girl
swimming a few yards from the ship. She, too, in some miraculous way,
had eluded the bullets that had meant to check her flight, but it was
apparent that unless help reached her soon she would sink. It so happened
that one of the boats was moored alongside, and two or three of the boys
jumped into it and rowed out to her. Now, it was against our agreement to
load refugees except at the wharf, and no officer was permitted to allow it.
As I stood watching those boys row out to rescue the girl, I caught sight out
of the corner of my eye of one of the officers coming our way. I watched to
see what would happen. He took in the situation instantly, and as quickly
turned and walked away. Officially he had observed nothing; personally he
had seen enough to realize that a life was being saved, and he had no wish
to prevent it.
The boat reached the girl in time, and the boys drew her to safety. She was
so exhausted from the ordeal that she fainted dead away, and had to be
carried up on deck. She appeared to be about seventeen or eighteen years
old, evidently one of those who had suffered most in the horrors of the past
few days, for she looked pale and thin, and was thoroughly chilled from
lack of proper clothing and from the long swim. We got some blankets and
wrapped her up in them, and she finally revived.
She looked at us with a wild expression in her eyes, seeing all these men
standing about her, and we read horror and nameless dread in her face.
Finally, however, she realized that she was safe and in the hands of friends
who would protect her, and such a look of joy and thankfulness came over
her face as I shall never forget. Then thoughts of what she had been through
gripped her, for she began to cry, calling out some name in her grief. We
were helpless, for we could not understand a word of what she was
saying. We gathered, however, that she was calling the name of someone
whom she had been forced to leave. I then bethought me of the little fellow
I had sequestered behind the boat, and hurried back to my stowaway to see
if he could help us with his Armenian and his few words of English. I
found him curled up on a sleep of sheer exhaustion, perfectly oblivious to
the tragedies that were going on all around him. I gently shook him, telling
him to come with me a moment. He got up and took my hand, and together
we made our way toward the group standing about the frightened grief-torn
girl. As we approached, the ring parted, and we could see the girl lying on
the deck.
Suddenly I felt the hand in mine tighten, and heard a sharp intake of breath.
A moment later, with a wild, fluttering cry, the little fellow bounded from
my side and threw himself on the girl. Startled from her sobbing she sat up,
fixing frightened eyes on the boy. Then from her lips there burst the name
that had been moaned in grief before, but now cried out in tones of such
frenzied joy that there was no doubt in our minds but that my little
stowaway was the one she had been calling for all along. He was her
brother, and there on the deck of that ship, all unconsciously, we had
reunited them. One or two storm-hardened, weather-beaten, globe-traveled
‘gobs’ turned and left the group, their eyes brimming with tears, a sort of
primitive shame driving them to conceal their emotions. They needn’t have
slunk away. Every man of us there had a lump in his throat and tears in his
eyes. Gradually, however, we all tip-toed away, leaving the happy pair to
share together a joy little known in that harbor. I managed the next day to
put them on a ship bound for Athens, and later when I got there I looked
them up, and have seen them two or three times since.