3. The Megali Idea

THE MEGALI IDEA
T
he Megali Idea (Greek: Great Idea) is the irredentist concept of Greek
nationalism that expressed the goal of establishing a Greek state that would
encompass all ethnic Greek-inhabited areas, including the large Greek
populations that, after the restoration of Greek independence in 1830 from
the Ottoman Empire, still lived under Ottoman occupation.
Irredentism (from Italian irredento for ‘unredeemed’) is any political or
popular movement intended to reclaim and reoccupy a lost homeland. As
such irredentism tries to justify its territorial claims on the basis of (real or
imagined) historic and/or ethnic affiliations. It is often advocated by
nationalist and pan-nationalist movements and has been a feature of identity
politics, cultural and political geography.
The term appeared for the first time during the debates of Prime Minister
Ioannis Kolettis with King Otto that preceded the promulgation of the 1844
constitution. This was a visionary nationalist aspiration that was to dominate
foreign relations and, to a significant extent, determine domestic politics of
the Greek state for much of the first century of its independent existence. If
the expression was new in 1844, the concept had roots in the Greek popular
psyche, nurtured as it was by old hopes that had kept hopes of eventual
liberation from Turkish rule. The Greeks hoped to restore the imperial state
like the days of the Byzantines. This is reflected in the folk saying:
“Once more, as years and time go by, once more they shall be ours.”
The Megali Idea implied the goal of reviving the Eastern Roman Byzantine
Empire. The objective was to establish a Greek state which would be, as
ancient geographer Strabo wrote, a Greek world encompassing mostly the
former Byzantine lands from the Ionian Sea to the west, to Turkey and the
Black Sea to the east, and from Thrace, Macedonia and Epirus to the north, to
Crete and Cyprus to the south. This new state would have Constantinople
(Istanbul today) as its capital. The state would be the ‘Greece of Two
Continents and Five Seas’ (Europe and Asia, and the Ionian, Aegean,
Marmara, Black and Libyan Seas, respectively.)
Prime Minister Ioannis Kolettis and King Otto were attempting to unify the
people of a recently liberated nation, Greece. In history we know that leaders
used this technique of a single objective to unify people. Hitler blamed the
Jews for all the problems after World War One in Germany. Iran today
blames their problems on Israel and the U.S. Putin of Russia blames the
West. In Greece, the statement of the Megali Idea was not against anyone, but
did have the desired effect of unifying the Greek people behind their
leadership. The Megali Idea was the statement of a mythical objective
without consideration of the practical realities. The political leaders then and
in subsequent generations had the power they needed to take Greece in the
direction chosen by the leaders.
By contrast, a democracy depends on an informed public that participates
in decision making on behalf of the entire population. Greece did not have an
informed and participating population to prevent mistakes of a few
politicians.
The practical realities of the Megali Idea included issues like minorities to
be dominated by the Greek state. The Greeks did not like living under the
heel of Ottoman authority. However, now the minorities in the Greek state
would live under the Greek authority. Somehow that is acceptable by the
Megali Idea. Certainly in Turkey, for example, there were many Muslim
Turks who would be subjects of the proposed Greek state. There were
Muslim Turks in Crete and Cyprus. There were large concentrations of Jews
in Asia Minor and peoples of other ethnic backgrounds. What rights and
future did they have? What happens if these people who are not ethnic Greek
do not accept the Greek state? In fact, the Muslim Turks in Turkey (Asia
Minor) out numbered the ethnic Greeks.
As a matter of law, the ethnic Greeks living in Turkey had been there for
many generations and were Turkish citizens. They were not recognized in the
law as Greek citizens. Do these Turkish citizens whose ancestors came from
Greece have a vote or say in converting their homeland, Turkey, to become
part of a Greek state? This was never presented to the Greek people when
the Megali Idea was adopted as the foreign policy of Greece by the Greek
politicians.
In the United States there are citizens whose ancestors came from Ireland,
Germany, China and many other countries. They by birth or naturalization are
U.S. citizens and not citizens of the country from which their ancestors came.
This definition of citizenship in international law was not made clear to the
citizens of Greece and to the ethnic Greeks who were citizens of other
countries. The Megali Idea was promoted in Greece without citizenship
being made clear to the Greek citizens.
If the logic of the Greek politicians is adopted, then today Ireland could
claim that New York City is part of Ireland. The Irish claim would be based
on some people living in New York City had grandparents who came to the
U.S. generations earlier. Then we would have to ask in a New York City that
is part of Ireland, what rights do African Americans, Hispanic Americans
and all other Americans have? The same practical problem existed when the
Greek leaders claimed a right to control and dictate the futures of people
beyond the sovereign borders of Greece. Those ethic Greeks in places like
Pontus were Turkish citizens and not Greek citizens just like the ethnic Irish
living in New York City are Americans and not Irish.
There are other huge practical problems with the Megali Idea. Do the
ethnic Greeks who are citizens of other countries like Turkey get to vote or in
some other way participate in the decision to make where they live part of a
Greek state? If the ethnic Greek or other peoples who are not identified as
ethnic Greek resist the imposition of a Greek state upon them, what rights and
future do they have?
In Greece there was substantial support within the population for the
mythical concept of the Megali Idea. However, the prospect that the pursuit
of the Megali Idea might lead to war where many Greeks could die and the
debt would become greater was never debated and put to a vote. The Greek
population was not given an opportunity to decide its future. The political
leadership, with the Greek military acting at the direction of the political
leaders, pressed on with the objective to expand the size of the Greek state.
The Greek sovereign, that is, the Greek people, did not approve by national
referendum of the popular idea.
Greece did expand successfully until 1922, but did not have serious
resistance. Greece annexed the Ionian Islands (1864), Thessaly (1881),
southern Macedonia, Crete, southern Epirus and the Eastern Aegean Islands
(1913), Western Thrace (1920), and the Dodecanese (1947). Crete, for
example, was occupied by Turks from the Ottoman era and ethnic Greeks.
The Turks were forced to leave the island so that only ethnic Greeks
remained. Then Crete became part of Greece. This is what the Greeks
attempted in 1974 in Cyprus.
If we ask people what their objectives are, the answer is peace and
prosperity. People do not want to send their sons and daughters off to war.
That was true in Greece as it is everywhere. It is the political leaders who
create these wars.
“The worst evils which mankind ever had to endure were inflicted by bad
governments. The state can be and has often been in the course of history the
main source of mischief and disaster.” Ludwig von Mises,
Greece for more than 2000 years depended on Turkey as a source of raw
materials. Greece is poor in agriculture and depends on the importation of
food and other items. Greece became and remains a great maritime nation to
support its citizens. So Greek and other European merchants imported grain,
olives, tobacco, rugs and other products from Turkey. The Turks imported
manufactured and processed products in exchange for the raw materials they
exported. Turks on the whole were uneducated in contrast to the Greeks who
were educated. Greeks had friends around the world and access to foreign
markets. The Turks did not have an export industry or ships to deliver their
products. The Turks were dependent on the Greeks.
The Greek leaders starting with Prime Minister Ioannis Kolettis and King
Otto had the option of using military force to acquire foreign lands. The
Greek leaders, following a long history of Byzantine diplomacy, could have
negotiated agreements that built on long-established relationships in Turkey
that would have benefited Greece and made a strong ally of the Turks. That
peaceful option was not considered.
Greece stayed out of World War One until the end of the War. The British
wanted the Greeks to join the Allies to help defeat the Central Powers.
Greece was led by Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos who wanted to join
the Allies. Opposed was King Constantine and his supporters who were
called Royalists. Greece was polarized into two camps, one that supported
the Prime Minister and one that supported the King.
In all wars up to and including World War One victors took spoils from
losers. Prime Minister Venizelos committed Greece to the Allies near the end
of the War so that Greece could sit at the table when the spoils of the War
were divided. World War One ended with the Treaty of Paris. A separate
Treaty of Sevres was drawn for the disposition of Turkey which was an ally
of the Central Powers, that is, Germany. The Treaty of Sevres was signed in
1920 by representatives of the Sultan who was in charge of the Ottoman
Government. The Ottomans were called the sick man of Europe at that time.
The Sultan who was resident in Istanbul had lost control over most of the
country of Turkey. The Treaty provided that Greece could annex Smyrna and
surrounding area, and parts of Turkey would be ceded to Italy, France and
Great Britain. Greece had landed its army in Smyrna in 1919, and the Sultan
dispatched his legendary general of the Turkish Army who had defended
Gallipoli and Istanbul from the British Empire during World War One to
eastern Turkey to disarm the Turkish Army. That general, Mustafa Kemal, did
not disarm the army. He formed the Nationalist Government, and negotiated
an agreement with Russia that occupied Armenia to fix the border. As part of
the agreement the Nationalist Government acquired surplus World War One
arms from the Russians. Then Mustafa Kemal led his army across Turkey to
attack the Greek Army.
The Allies, including Greece, had reached an agreement with the Sultan
who could not enforce the agreement. The Treaty of Sevres was of no value
to the Allies, and the Nationalist Government led by Mustafa Kemal rejected
the Treaty. Now the Greek people and their Army had been led to a war by
the political leaders of Greece, and in particular Prime Minister Venizelos,
without the Greek population being fully informed and without a public vote
to authorize a war.
When Greek forces landed in Smyrna in 1919 General Kemal told the
Turkish forces in the Smyrna area to withdraw inland. That stretched out the
Greek supply lines. The Greek Army moved further inland and were
approaching the capital of the Turkish Nationalist Government, Ankara. The
Greek Army had been in the field in Turkey for three years and longer for
many of the soldiers who had also fought in the Balkans. The soldiers were
hungry and tired. Most just wanted to go home to Greece. Prime Minister
Venizelos had been replaced by King Constantine. The King replaced many
of the leaders in the Army with people loyal to him. Supporters of Venizelos
claimed the replacements were not as qualified as the personnel loyal to
Venizelos. The Turks selected the river at Sakarya to engage the Greek Army.
The location gave the Turks an impenetrable tactical advantage, and the
Greek Army was quickly defeated.
Once the Greek Army was defeated all the Greek Government did was
provide ships to remove the Army from Turkey. No provision was made to
protect or remove the ethnic Greek refugees or any other innocent victims of
the disastrous decisions of the Greek Government. The Greek military should
have established a defensive perimeter around Smyrna using the 200,000
Greek soldiers who were in Turkey. That is a standard military practice, but
the Greek military did nothing to protect the civilians.
The rescue of the Greek civilians and others was conceived and
implemented by a Christian hunch back who had only been in Turkey a few
weeks. He received critical help from Captain Ioannis Theofanides of the
Greek Navy. The Captain was kicked out of the Navy shortly after his heroic
service to his country. This Captain is the real hero of Greece, but the Greek
people today do not know his name. There are no monuments or recognition
in Greece today for the American or Greek Captain. Instead, the Greek
politicians have, for example, named their beautiful airport in Athens after
Eleftherios Venizelos who led so many Greeks to their deaths and their nation
to poverty. The name of the airport should be changed to honor the Greek
Navy Captain, Ioannis Theofanides.
The Megali Idea sounded great to the Greek people when proclaimed by a
politician, but, in fact, led the Greek people to the greatest disaster
conceivable. Greece lost the lives of thousands of soldiers. The ethnic Greek
population, along with the ethnic Armenians and Jews were uprooted and
forced to leave their homeland. Many died, were raped and slaughtered.
Greece lost the bread basket that had fed Greece for over 2000 years. The
Megali Idea was a disaster for Greece of the greatest proportion.
Some say the Megali Idea is dead today, but that is not true. Many Greeks
today still believe in this mythical idea without considering the practical
considerations and consequences. As proof, Cyprus was a British territory
that became an independent country in 1960. Greek Cypriots greatly
outnumber Turkish Cypriots. The first President was Archbishop Makarios.
He at first promoted the idea of enosis which means unification with Greece.
The Turkish Cypriots did not want to become Greeks. Greek Army personnel
joined Greek Cypriots in a coup of President Makarios in 1974, and a war
broke out between the two populations. Britain, Greece and Turkey had
committed in 1960 to guarantee the sovereignty of all citizens of Cyprus.
Britain and Greece took no action to stop the killing. Turkey during the night
landed its Army in 1974 to stop the fighting. The Greek Cypriots from all
over the island were moved to south Cyprus, and the Turkish Cypriots to
north Cyprus. A fence line that reminds us of the Berlin Wall separates the
two populations, and the border is guarded by U.N. forces to this day. The
Turkish Army remains on the island to protect the safety and rights of the
Turkish Cypriot minority. Attempts at unification to date have failed, but
continue. The Greek Cypriot version of the Megali Idea is called enosis.
Many Greek Cypriots, despite their suffering, still support unification with
Greece, and simply want the Turkish Cypriots to leave Cyprus like the Turks
left Crete.
Greek Cypriots are Christians. Most belong to the Eastern Orthodox
Church. They believe in the teachings of Jesus Christ, but their actions
regarding Turkish Cypriots have been contrary to the teachings of Jesus
Christ. The religious leaders, that is, priests, have supported actions that are
contrary to the teachings of Jesus Christ. The obstacle to a better future for
all Cypriots is the attitude that is founded on the Megali Idea. The Megali
Idea is alive and well among Greeks.
The negotiations between Greek Cypriot political leaders and Turkish
political leaders can be summarized very simply. The Greek Cypriots have
continually engaged in circuitous and devious Byzantine negotiation tactics
with the sole purpose of frustrating the Turkish Cypriots. The Turkish
Cypriots do not understand the Greek Cypriot leaders or how to deal with
them. The Turkish Cypriot position is there will be an agreement when the
Greek Cypriots agree to all the terms of the Turkish Cypriots. That approach
does not work at home with their wives, and so it will not with the Greek
Cypriots. The endemic Turkish mentality was necessary and successful when
defending Gallipoli, but does not work when negotiating. Both sides would
benefit by focusing on the common good that will advance all Cypriots, and
make offers that benefit the other party without creating great damage to the
party that makes the offer. Call this a Christian approach, if you like. Public
polls show that some 60% of the Greek Cypriots oppose a unification with
the Turkish Cypriots. That suggests that any agreement made by the current
leaders under the auspices of the United Nations will be rejected at the polls
as it was by the Greek Cypriots previously. The American Christian
leadership that was present in Smyrna in 1922 is absent from Cyprus today.
Today the Greek people, a proud people, are on their knees poor and
struggling. The destruction of the Greek economy started with the ill
conceived adventure into Turkey in 1919 and has continued with generations
of politicians who have been less than honest with the public. The politicians
have promised what they cannot deliver, and the people are suffering. Seeing
such wonderful, proud people in such a wretched condition is very sad.
Albert Einstein, perhaps the most intelligent man of the 20th century, said:
“Only two things are infinite, the universe and human stupidity, and I’m not
sure about the former.”